Project Gutenberg's The Scouring of the White Horse, by Thomas Hughes

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Scouring of the White Horse
       Or, The Long Vacation Ramble of a London Clerk

Author: Thomas Hughes

Illustrator: Richard Doyle

Release Date: October 9, 2016 [EBook #53241]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SCOURING OF THE WHITE HORSE ***




Produced by David Edwards and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)










THE SCOURING OF THE WHITE HORSE.

[Illustration]




                                  THE
                     SCOURING OF THE WHITE HORSE;
                                OR, THE
                LONG VACATION RAMBLE OF A LONDON CLERK.

                                  BY
               THE AUTHOR OF “TOM BROWN’S SCHOOL DAYS.”

                            [Illustration]

                     ILLUSTRATED BY RICHARD DOYLE.

                                BOSTON:
                          TICKNOR AND FIELDS.
                               MDCCCLIX.

                           AUTHOR’S EDITION.

                            FIFTH THOUSAND.

                         RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE:
                      STEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BY
                      H. O. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY.




OLD AND NEW.


    See how the Autumn leaves float by, decaying,
      Down the red whirls of yon rain-swollen stream;
    So fleet the works of men, back to their earth again;
      Ancient and holy things fade like a dream.

    Nay! see the Spring blossoms steal forth a-maying,
      Clothing with tender buds orchard and glen;
    So, though old forms go by, ne’er can their spirit die.
      Look! England’s bare boughs show green leaf again.

                                                  KINGSLEY.

[Illustration]




PREFACE.


The great success of the festival (or “pastime,” as it is called in the
neighbourhood) which was held on White Horse Hill on the 17th and 18th
of September, 1857, to celebrate the “Scouring of the Horse,” according
to immemorial custom, led the Committee of Management to think that our
fellow-county-men at least, if not our countrymen generally, would be
glad to have some little printed memorial, which should comprise not
only an account of the doings on the Hill on the late occasion, but
should also endeavour to gather up the scattered legends and traditions
of the country side, and any authentic historical notices relating to
the old monument, of which we west-countrymen are all so fond and proud.

I had the good or ill luck (as the case may be) to be the only member
of the Committee whose way of life had led him into the perilous paths
of literature; so the task of compiling and editing our little book was
laid on my shoulders.

Installed as chronicler to the White Horse, I entered with no ill will
on my office, having been all my life possessed, as is the case with
so many Englishmen, by intense local attachment, love for every stone
and turf of the country where I was born and bred. But it is one
thing to have zeal, and another to have discretion; and when I came to
consider my materials, I found that the latter quality would be greatly
needed. For, what were they? One short bright gleam of history from the
writings of old monks a thousand years ago; traditions and dim legends,
which I and most Berkshire men have always faithfully believed from
our youth up, and shall go on believing to our dying day, but which
we could hardly put before general readers in serious narrative; a
dry notice here and there by some old antiquary of the seventeenth or
eighteenth century; stories floating in the memories of old men still
living; small broad-sheets from country town presses, with lists of the
competitors for prizes at rustic games, newspaper articles, remarks by
Committee-men and umpires, scraps of antiquarian lore; abuse of the
Great Western Railway for not allowing the trains to stop, bits of
vernacular dialogue, and odd rhymes. What could be done with them all?
How out of the mass could a shapely book be called out, fit to be laid
before a fastidious British public, not born in Berkshire?

Not exactly seeing how this was to be done, the only honest course
which remained, was to follow the example of a good housewife in the
composition of that excellent food called “stir-about”--throw them
altogether into the pot, stir them round and round with a great spoon,
and trust that the look of the few great raisins, and the flavour of
the allspice, may leaven the mass, and make it pleasing to the eye and
palate; and so, though the stir-about will never stand up in a china
dish by itself, it may, we hope, make a savoury and pleasant side dish,
in a common soup tureen.

The raisins, and those of the best quality, have been furnished by the
great artist[1] who has kindly undertaken to give us pictures; the
allspice has been contributed by the Committee and other kind friends,
and I have done the milk and meal, and the stirring. The responsibility
therefore rests with me, though the credit, whatever it may be, rests
with others. But let me insist here, at once, that if there be any
failure in the dish, it is the fault of the dresser and not of the
subject-matter.

For, suppose an intelligent Englishman to be travelling in France, and
to find the whole population in the neighbourhood of Tours turning
out in their best clothes for a two days’ holiday on a high hill,
upon which the rude figure of a huge hammer is roughly sculptured.
On inquiry, he finds that the figure has been there long before the
memory of the oldest man living, but that it has always been carefully
preserved and kept fresh; and although there is no printed history of
how it came there, yet that all neighbouring men, of whatever degree,
associate it with the name of Charles Martel and his great victory over
the Saracens, and are ready one and all to rejoice over it, and to work
and pay that it may go down to their children looking as it does now.
Or, to come to much later times, let our traveller find an eagle cut
out on a hill in Hungary, similarly honoured, and associated with the
name of Eugene, and the memory of the day

    “When, the old black eagle flying,
    All the Paynim powers defying,
    On we marched, and stormed Belgrade.”

Should we not all thank him for giving us the best account he could of
the figure, the festival, and all traditions connected with them; and
think he had fallen on a very noteworthy matter, and well worth the
telling when he got back to England?

Well, here we have the same thing at our own doors; a rude colossal
figure cut out in the turf, and giving the name to a whole district;
legends connecting it with the name of our greatest king, and with his
great victory over the Pagans, and a festival which has been held at
very short intervals ever since the ninth century. Rich as our land is
in historical monuments, there is none more remarkable than the White
Horse; and in this belief we put forth this little book in his honour,
hoping that it may perhaps fix upon him, and the other antiquities
which surround him, the attention of some one who can bring science and
knowledge to bear upon the task to which we can only bring good will.

For, alas! let me confess at once, that in these qualities our book
is like to be sadly deficient. The compiler has no knowledge whatever
of the Anglo-Saxon tongue, or of Saxon or other antiquities. There
is indeed of necessity a semblance of learning and research about the
chapter which tells the history of the battle of Ashdown, because the
materials for it had to be collected from a number of old chroniclers,
whose names will be found in the foot-notes. But any fifth-form
boy, with industry enough to read about 200 small pages of monkish
Latin, may master the whole for himself in the originals in a week;
and for those who cannot do this, there is the jubilee edition of
the chroniclers, put forth by the Alfred Committee in 1852, where a
translation of the old fellows will be found in parallel columns,
together with much learning concerning them and their times, in
foot-note, preface, and appendix. This translation I have followed
in all but a few passages, in which the text used by the translators
has probably differed from the one which I have seen. For the Saxon
Chronicle, I have used Ingram’s translation.

But while we do not pretend to be antiquaries, or historians, or
learned men, we do claim to be honest average Englishmen, and will
yield to no man in our love for our own quiet corner of the land of our
birth. We do think, that whatever deeply interests us cannot fail in a
degree to interest our countrymen. We are sure that reverence for all
great Englishmen, and a loving remembrance of the great deeds done by
them in old times, will help to bring to life in us the feeling that we
are a family, bound together to work out God’s purposes in this little
island, and in the uttermost parts of the earth; to make clear to us
the noble inheritance which we have in common; and to sink into their
proper place the miserable trifles, and odds and ends, over which we
are so apt to wrangle. We do hope that our example will lead Englishmen
of other counties, to cherish every legend and story which hangs round
any nook of their neighbourhood, connecting it with the times and the
men who have gone before; to let no old custom, which has a meaning,
however rude, die out, if it can be kept alive; and not to keep either
legend or custom to themselves, but (like us) to put them in the best
shape they can, and publish them for the benefit of their countrymen;
we of the White Horse Committee, at any rate, hereby pledging ourselves
to read all such publications.

I must here take the opportunity of specially thanking three of my
fellow Committee-men, and two other friends, for the trouble they have
taken in various ways to lighten my work. If this book at all fulfils
the objects for which it has been written, the thanks of my readers, as
well as my own, will be due to

    E. M. ATKINS, Esq., of Kingstone Lisle.

    Mr. WILLIAM WHITFIELD of Uffington.

    Mr. HEBER HUMFREY of Kingstone Farm; and to

    JOHN Y. AKERMAN, Esq., Secretary of the Society of Antiquaries;
    and

    Mr. LUKE LONSLEY, of Hampsted Norris, Berks.

And now, without further preface, we commend our “stir-about” to
Englishmen in general, and west-countrymen in particular.

[1] Doyle.




THE SCOURING OF THE WHITE HORSE.




CHAPTER I.


“Richard,” said our governor, as I entered his room at five o’clock on
the afternoon of the 31st of August, 1857, running his pen down the
columns of the salary-book, “your quarter-day to-day, I think? Let
me see; you were raised to £-- a-year in February last,--so much for
quarter’s salary, and so much for extra work. I am glad to see that you
have been working so steadily; you’ll deserve your holiday, and enjoy
it all the more. You’ll find that all right, I think;” and he pushed a
small paper across the table towards me, on which my account was stated
in our cashier’s hand, and looked at me over his spectacles.

My heart jumped at the mention of my holiday; I just ran my eye down
the figures, and was glad to find the total a pound or two higher than
I had expected. For I had lately learnt shorthand, and had been taking
notes for our firm, for which I found they allowed me extra pay.

“Quite right, Sir,” I said; “and I’m sure I’m much obliged to you, Sir,
for letting me do the extra work, because--”

“Well, never mind that,” said he, with a little laugh; “I shouldn’t
give you the extra work, Richard, if it didn’t suit me, or if I could
get it better done anywhere else; so the account’s all square on that
point. There’s your money.”

And he pushed over to me a very nice sum of money. I dare say you would
like to know what it was, reader. Now, I’m not going to tell you. Why
should you know just what my income is? I don’t owe you or any one else
five shillings, and have a very tidy account at the savings’ bank,
besides having paid for all the furniture and books in my room, not
very far from Lambsconduit Street, which I reckon to be worth fifty
pounds of any man’s money; so you see my income is enough to keep me
before the world, and I wish more of you could say as much.

“I’m very much obliged, Sir,” said I again, as I wrote a receipt over a
stamp which I took out of my pocket-book, and stuck on to the bottom of
the account.

“No, you’re not,” said our governor, quite short; “it’s your own money,
fairly earned. You’re not obliged to any man for giving you what’s your
own.” He is such an odd fellow about these things. But mind you, I
think he’s quite right, too; for, after all, no doubt each of us earns
a good penny for him over and above what he pays us, else why should he
keep us on? but, somehow, one can’t help thanking any one who pays one
money; at least, I can’t.

“Now, as to your holiday,” went on our governor. “There’s Jobson went
for his fortnight on the 30th; he’ll be back on the 14th of September,
at latest. You can take any time you like, after that.”

“Then, Sir,” said I directly, “I should like it as soon as possible.”

“Very well,” said he; “Tuesday the 16th to Tuesday the 29th of
September, both inclusive;” and he made a note in another book which
lay on his desk. “Good evening, Richard.”

“Good evening, Sir,” said I; and away I went down to our room in as
good spirits as any young fellow in our quarter of London.

Of course all the other clerks began shouting out at once to know how
much money I’d got, and when I was going to have my holiday. Well, I
didn’t tell them what money I had, any more than I’ve told you, because
I like to keep my own counsel about such matters. Besides, there are
several of our clerks whose ways I don’t at all like; so I don’t do any
thing I can help which might look as if I liked them. No! hands off, is
my motto with these sort of chaps.

I’m sure there’s no pride about me, though. My name’s Easy, and always
was; and I like every fellow, whatever his coat is, who isn’t always
thinking about the cut of it, or what he has in the pocket of it. But,
goodness knows, I can’t stand a fellow who gives himself airs, and
thinks himself a chalk above everybody who can’t dress and do just as
he can. Those chaps, I always see, are just the ones to do lick-spittle
to those that they think have more in their pockets than themselves.

But I must get on with my story, for you don’t all want to know my
opinions about the clerks in our office, I dare say.

Well, when I got down, as I said before, we were all just on the move,
(business hours being from nine till six in our office,) taking down
coats and hats, and clearing desks for the night, so I just sidled up
to Jem Fisher, and little Neddy Baily, who are the two I like best, and
told them to come up to my room to supper at eight o’clock, which they
of course were very glad to promise to do, and then I went off to get
ready for them.

Jem Fisher and I are very fond of a dish which I believe very few
of you ever heard of. One Sunday in May, a year or two back, he and
I had been down beyond Notting Hill, listening to the nightingales;
and coming back, we walked through Kensington Gardens, and came out
at the gate into the Notting Hill Road, close to Hyde Park. We were
late, for us, so we hailed a ’bus, and got on the box. The driver was
full of talk about all the fine people he had been seeing walking in
the gardens that afternoon, and seemed to think it hard he couldn’t
enjoy himself just as they did. “However, gentlemen,” said he at
last, “there’s some things as the haristocracy ain’t alive to. Did
you ever eat cow-heel?” Perhaps Jem, who had all his best clothes on,
didn’t mind being taken for one of the aristocracy; at least just for
a minute, for he’s too good a fellow to like being taken for anybody
but himself when he comes to think of it; at any rate, he and I took to
eating cow-heel from that time. So the first thing I did, after going
home and locking up most of my money, and speaking to my landlady, who
is the best old soul alive if you take her in her own way, was, to set
off to Clare Market, and buy some cow-heel and sausages; and on my
way back through the Turnstile, I thought, as it was so hot, I would
have some fruit too; so I bought a pottle of plums and a piece of a
pine-apple, and got home.

They came in sharp to time, and I and my landlady had every thing
ready, and two foaming pewter pots full of bitter beer and porter. So
we had a capital supper, and then cleared it all away, and sat down to
eat the fruit and have a quiet pipe by the time it began to get dark.

“And so,” said little Neddy, (he is only just eighteen, and hasn’t
been in our office a year yet; but he’s such a clever, industrious
little chap, that he has gone over the heads of half a dozen of our
youngsters, and hasn’t stopped yet by a long way,) “you’re off on the
15th! wish I was. Well, here’s luck any how,” said he, nodding to me,
and taking a bite out of a slice of pine-apple.

“Gentle Shepherd, tell me where?” said Jem Fisher. (Jem is very fond of
quoting poetry; not that I think half that he quotes is real poetry,
only how is one to find him out? Jem is a tall, good-looking fellow,
as old as I am, and that’s twenty-one last birthday; we came into the
office together years ago, and have been very thick ever since, which
I sometimes wonder at, for Jem is a bit of a swell--Gentleman Jem they
call him in the office.) “Now, Dick, where are you bound for?”

“Well, that’s more than I know myself,” said I.

“Then,” said he, taking his pipe out of his pocket and filling it, “I
vote we settle for him, eh, Neddy?”

“Aye, aye, Sir,” said Neddy, stretching over for the pottle; “but, I
say, Jem, you haven’t finished all those plums?” and he poked about in
the leaves with his fingers.

“Every mother’s son of them,” said Jem, lighting a lucifer; “if you
come to that, Master Ned, hand me over some of that pine-apple. But
now, about the tour; how much money are you going to spend on it, Dick?”

“Well, I haven’t quite settled,” said I; “but I shouldn’t mind, now,
going as high as four or five pounds, if I can suit myself.”

“You may go pretty near to Jericho for that now-a-days,” said Neddy.
“As I came along Holborn to-night, I saw a great placard outside the
George and Blue Boar, with ‘to Llangollen and back 15_s._’ on it. What
do you think of that? You’ll be turned out at the station there with £4
5_s._ in your pocket.”

“Where’s Llangollen?” said I.

“Not half-way to Jericho,” shouted Jem, with a laugh. “Where’s
Llangollen? Why didn’t you ever hear the song of Kitty Morgan, the maid
of Llangollen? You’re a pretty fellow to go touring.”

“Yes, fifty times,” said I; “only the song don’t tell you where the
place is--where is it now?”

“In Wales, of course,” said he, thinking he had me.

“Yes, I know that; but whereabouts in Wales,” said I, “for Wales is a
biggish place. Is it near any thing one reads about in books, and ought
to go and see?”

“Hanged if I know exactly,” said Jem, puffing away; “only of course
Wales is worth seeing.”

“So is France,” struck in Neddy; “why, you may go to Paris and stay a
fortnight for I don’t know how little.”

“Aye, or to Edinburgh or the Lakes,” said Jem.

“I want to have the particulars though,” said I; “I’m not going to
start off to some foreign place, and find myself with no money to spend
and enjoy myself with, when I get there.”

“I’ll tell you what,” said Neddy, jumping up, “I’ll just run round to
the Working Men’s College, and borrow a Bradshaw from the secretary. We
shall find all the cheap excursions there;” and away he went before we
could say a word.

“I say,” said Jem to me, “how fond he is of bringing up that place;
he’s always at me to go and enter there.”

“So he is at me,” said I, “and I think I shall, for he seems to pick
up a lot of things there. How sharp he is at figures! and he knows
more history and geography ten to one than I do. I’ll bet he knew what
county Llangollen is in, and something about it too. Let’s ask him when
he comes back.”

“Catch me!” said Jem; “he’ll look it out on the map on his way back, or
ask one of the lecturers.”

“Here you are! look here!” said Neddy, tumbling in with two Bradshaws
and a great atlas under his arm; “‘unprecedented attraction, pleasure
excursions,’ let me see--Return tickets for Ireland, available for a
fortnight. Waterford, 1_l._ 16_s._; Cork, 2_l._”

“Nonsense!” cried Jem, who had got the other Bradshaw; “listen here:
‘Channel Islands, (remarkable as being the only remaining Norman
possessions of the British crown,) second class and fore cabin, 21_s._”

“‘London to Dieppe, return tickets available for fourteen days, second
class, 21_s._,’” sung out Ned, from the other Bradshaw.

And away they went, with Brussels, and Bangor, and the Manchester
Exhibition, and Plymouth and Glasgow, and the Isle of Man, and Margate
and Ramsgate, and the Isle of Wight; and then to Gibraltar and Malta
and New York, and all over the world. I sat and smoked my pipe, for
’twas no use trying to settle any thing; but presently, when they got
tired, we set to work and began to put down the figures. However, that
wasn’t much better, for there were such a lot of tours to go; and one
was a bit too short, and the other too long, and this cost too much,
and that too little; so all the beer was gone, and we were no nearer
settling any thing when eleven o’clock struck.

“Well,” said Jem, getting up and knocking the ashes out of his third
pipe, “I declare it’s almost as good as going a tour one’s self,
settling it for Dick here.”

“I just wish you had settled it,” said I; “I’m more puzzled than when
we began.”

“Heigh-ho, fellows never know when they’re well off,” said Neddy; “now
I never get a chance. In my holiday I just go down to the old folk at
Romford, and there I stick.”

“They don’t indeed,” said I; “I wonder to hear you talk like that,
Ned. Some folks would give all they’re worth to have old folk to go to.”

“Well, I didn’t mean it,” said he, looking hurt. And I don’t believe he
did, for a kinder hearted fellow don’t live; and I was half sorry I had
said what I did say.

“Further deliberation will be necessary,” said Jem, lighting his fourth
pipe; “we’ll come again to-morrow night; your bacchy’s nearly out,
Dick; lay in some bird’s eye for to-morrow; real Bristol, do you hear?”

“Time to go, I suppose,” said Ned, getting up and gathering the
Bradshaws and atlas together; “are we to come again to-morrow, Dick?”

“To-morrow, didst thou say? methought I heard Horatio say to-morrow.
Go to; it is a thing of naught,” and Jem clapped on his hat and began
ranting in his way; so I broke in--

“I wish you’d hold that noise, and talk sense,” said I.

“Shakspeare!” said Jem, stopping short and pulling up his collar.

“Gammon!” said Neddy, bursting out laughing.

“That’s right, Neddy,” said I; “he’s always going off with some of his
nonsense, and calling it poetry.”

“I didn’t say it was poetry, did I?” said Jem.

“What is it then?” said I.

“Blank verse,” said he.

“What’s the difference?” said I.

“Go up the mill-dam, fall down slam, dat poetry; go up the mill-dam,
fall down whoppo’, dat plank verse,” said he. “Go along nigger--had
him dere, nigger,” and he turned in his knees and grinned, like one of
those poor beggars who black their faces and go about the streets with
red striped trowsers, white ties, and banjos.

“You ought to be a nigger yourself, Jem,” said I, “and I should just
like to have the driving of you. There, tumble out with you; it’s time
for steady folks to turn in.”

So I turned them out and held the candle, while they floundered down
stairs, that wretch, Jem, singing, “There’s some ’un in de house wid
Dinah,” loud enough to be heard at the Foundling. I was glad to hear my
landlady catch him at the bottom of the stairs, and give it him well
about “a respectable house,” and “what she was used to with her gents,”
while she opened the door; only I don’t see what right she had to give
it me all over again next morning at breakfast, and call Jem Fisher a
wild young man, and bad company, because that’s just what he isn’t,
only a little noisy sometimes. And as if I’m not to have who I please
up to my room without her interfering! I pay my rent regular every
month, I know. However, I didn’t mind much what she said at breakfast
time, because I had got a letter from the country. I don’t get a letter
once a month, and it’s very odd this one should have come on this very
morning, when I was puzzling where to go for my holiday; and I dare say
you’ll think so too, when I tell you what it was about. Let’s see--here
it is in my pocket, so you shall have it whole:--

                            “Elm Close Farm, Berks, August 31, 1857.

    “DEAR DICK,--You know you owe me a visit, for you’ve never been
    down here, often as I’ve asked you, since we was at school
    together--and I have been up to you four or five times. Now,
    why I particularly want you to come this month is, because
    we’ve got some sport to show you down in these quiet parts,
    which don’t happen every day. You see there’s an old White
    Horse cut out in the side of the highest hill hereabouts, (a
    regular break-neck place it is, and there ain’t three men in
    the country as’ll ride along the hill-side under the Horse,)
    and many folks sets a good deal of store by it, and seems to
    think the world’d come to an end if the horse wasn’t kept all
    straight. May be I’m a bit of that mind myself--anyhow you’ll
    see by the paper inside what’s going on; and being a scholar,
    may be you’ll know about the White Horse, and like to come down
    to a scouring. And I can tell you it will be good fun; for I
    remember the last, when I was quite a little chap, before I
    went to school, and I’ve never seen such games since. You’ve
    only got to write and say what train you’ll come by, and I’ll
    meet you at the Farringdon-road station in my trap. So, as I
    ain’t much of a penman, excuse mistakes, and remember me to
    Fisher and the others I met at your place; and no more at
    present from yours truly.

                                                     “JOSEPH HURST.

    “P. S.--You must stay as long as you can, and I’ll mount you on
    my young bay colt to see a cub killed.”

I shouldn’t print Joe’s letter whole, (and as it is I’ve put a good
deal of the spelling right,) only I’m quite sure he’ll never read this
book, and I hope it may serve as a warning to young fellows to keep up
their learning when they go and settle down in the country. For when
Joe left the Commercial Academy at Brentford, he could write just as
good English as I, and if he had put “many folks seems to think,” or
“you’ve only got to write,” in a theme, old Hopkins would have given
him a good caning. But nothing wears out learning so quick as living
in the country and farming, and Joe came into his farm when he was
nineteen, and has been at it ever since. And after all, perhaps, it
doesn’t much signify, because nobody makes himself better understood
than Joe, in one way or another; and if he wasn’t a little behindhand
in his grammar, he wouldn’t think much of me perhaps--and one don’t
mind being taken for a scholar, even by those who are not the best
judges in the world.

Well, thinks I to myself, as I finished my breakfast, this seems like
business. If I go down to Joe’s, and stay there all my holiday, the
fares will be only seventeen shillings; and, say a pound for expenses
down there; one pound seventeen shillings, say two pounds in all. I
shall put three pounds into my pocket, and please an old friend, which
will be much better than any thing Jem Fisher and little Neddy Baily
will hit out for me in a week from the end of Bradshaw. Besides, it
will look well to be able to talk of going to a friend in Berkshire.
I’ll write to Joe, and say I’ll be with him in good time on the 15th.

So I went down to the office and told Jem Fisher and little Neddy, that
I had made up my mind to go and see my old friend Joe, in Berkshire,
before they had had time to get their office coats on.

“What? that jolly fellow with the brown face and red whiskers,” said
Jem, “who came up and slept in your room last Christmas cattle-show,
and wanted to fight the cabman for a gallon of beer, who charged him
half-a-crown from Baker Street to Gray’s Inn Lane?”

“Yes,” said I, “that’s the man.”

“I remember him well,” said Neddy; “and I’m sure you’ll have a good
time of it if you go to see him. But, I say, how about supper to-night?
You won’t want us and the Bradshaws any more, eh?”

“Oh, he isn’t going to get out of it like that,” said Jem, as he
settled to his desk, and got his work out. “I say, Dick, you’re not
going to be off now, are you? I know better.”

“I never was on that I know of,” said I; “however, I don’t mind
standing supper at the Cheshire Cheese; but I won’t have you fellows
up in my room again to-night, kicking up a row on the stairs. No! just
catch me at it!”

So I gave them a supper that night, and another the night after I came
back from my holiday.

They seemed just the same, but how different I felt. Only two short
weeks had passed, but I was as much changed as if it had been ten
years. I had found something which I never could get rid of, day or
night, and which kept me always in a fret and a struggle. What a life
I led with it! Sometimes it cast me down and made me ready to hang
myself; and then, again, it would lift me up, and seem to fill me with
warmth and sunshine. But, somehow, even when I was at the worst, if an
enchanter had come and offered to wipe it all out, and to put me back
just where I was the night before my holiday, I should have said “No;”
and at all other times I felt that it was the most precious part of my
life. What was it? Ah, what was it? Some of you will smile, and some
of you will sneer, when you find out, as you will (if you don’t skip)
before you get to the end of my story. And I can’t see the least reason
why I should help you to it a minute sooner.




CHAPTER II.


Now I do pity all the lords and great gentle-folk with nothing in the
world to do except to find out how to make things pleasant, and new
places to go to, and new ways of spending their money; at least, I
always pity them at the beginning of my holiday, though perhaps when
one first comes back to eleven months’ hard grind in town the feeling
isn’t quite so strong.

At any rate, I wouldn’t have changed places with the greatest lord in
the land on Tuesday morning, September 15th. I was up as soon as it was
light, and saw the sun rise over the Gray’s Inn Lane chimney-pots; and
I declare they looked quite beautiful. I didn’t know at all before what
a fine outline they make when the rays come flat along the roofs; and
mean often to get up in time to see them by sunrise next summer; but
just now it’s very cold of mornings, and I dare say they don’t look so
well. When I put my head out of window it was quite clear and fresh,
and I thought I could smell the country.

I hadn’t much to do, for I had packed my bag over night; but I went
over all my things again, and changed the places of some of them in my
old bureau, (which belonged to my father, who was clerk for forty years
in one of the oldest houses in Clement’s Inn,) and locked up all the
drawers; and then I set to work to lay breakfast for three, for I had
asked my two friends to come and see me off, and they had made it all
up with my landlady. So about six o’clock they came in, and we had a
capital breakfast; and then we started off to walk up to the Paddington
station, carrying my bag between us. I had settled to go by the 7.30
train, because if I hadn’t they couldn’t have come with me; besides, it
is the first train which stops at Farringdon-road; and I was very glad
when we got into the bustle of the station, for they were rather low,
and I felt almost ashamed of being so jolly, though certainly they had
had their holiday earlier in the year. But when I saw their faces out
of the window of the second-class carriage, just as the starting-bell
rang, I should like to have paid their fares out of my own pocket, if
they could have gone with me.

However, by the time we got past Wormwood Scrubbs, (which looked so
fresh and breezy with the gossamer lying all over it,) I could think of
nothing else but the country and my holiday. How I did enjoy the pretty
hill with the church at top and the stream at the bottom by Hanwell,
and the great old trees about half a mile off on the right before you
get to Slough, and the view of Windsor Castle, and crossing the Thames
at Maidenhead, with its splendid weeping willows, and the old Bath-road
bridge, and the reach beyond with the woods coming down to the bank,
and the great lords’ houses up above. And then all the corn-fields,
though by this time most of them were only stubble, and Reading town,
and the great lasher at Pangbourn, where the water was rushing and
dancing through in the sunlight to welcome me into Berkshire; and
the great stretches of open land about Wallingford-road and Didcot.
And after that came great green pasture-fields, and orchards, and
gray-stone farm-houses, and before I could turn round we were at
Farringdon-road station, and it was a quarter past eleven. As I got
out and gave up my ticket, I couldn’t help thinking of the two lines
Jem Fisher would go on saying when we went out walking in Combe Wood
and Richmond Park one Sunday this last May--

    How beautiful the country do appear
    At this time of the year.

I know he was laughing, and made them out of his own head, though he
declared they were in Chaucer; but they are just as true for all that,
whether Jem Fisher or Chaucer made them, though the English isn’t as
good as the sense.

There I found Joe waiting for me, with his trap, as he called it, at
the door, and the inn ostler standing by the head of the horse, which
was a bright chestnut, and looked very fine. I own I very much enjoyed
going off in that dark-green high-wheeled carriage.

“In with you, Dick,” cried out Joe, as he took hold of the reins, and
patted the horse on the neck. “There, shoot your bag in behind; look
alive, she don’t stand well. That’ll do,” he shouted to the ostler, who
jumped back and touched his hat just as if Joe owned half the parish.
If the horse couldn’t stand well, at any rate she could step out, and
away we whirled down the white road; Joe red in the face with holding
on, his feet well out to the splash-board, his chest thrown forward,
and his elbows down at his side, hauling the chestnut’s head right
back, till her nose nearly touched the collar. But for all that, away
went her legs right straight out in front, shooting along so fast that
I began to feel queer, not being used to horses, and took tight hold
of the seat with my left hand, so that Joe shouldn’t see; for the cart
jumped sometimes enough to pitch you out.

“Gently there, gently, my beauty,” said Joe, as the chestnut dropped
into a little quieter pace. “There, now, ain’t she a pictur’?” said he
to me;--“ever see a mare lay down to her work like that? Gently, my
beauty! if it wasn’t for the blaze in her face, and the white feet,
the Squir’d give me one hundred pounds for her to-morrow. And I won’t
sell her under. It’s a mortal shame to drive her. Her mouth’s like a
kitten’s.” How Joe could talk so, when he was pulling fit to burst
himself at the reins, I don’t know; I thought once or twice where we
should go to if one broke, but I didn’t say any thing. I found out
afterwards that Joe meant a great white mark, when he talked of the
blaze in her face. I suppose men can’t see any faults in their own
horses, any more than they can in their children.

After a bit, the pace got quite steady, and then I began to enjoy
myself, and could look at the famous rich fields, and the high hedges
full of great heavy masses of clematis, and sniff up all the country
smells, as we whirled along, and listen to Joe, who was going grinding
on about, ‘how badly the parish roads were kept up; and that he had set
his mind to have them well mended with flints instead of chalk, and
to have all the thistles at the side kept down, which were sowing the
whole country round, because their vestry was so stingy they wouldn’t
put any men on the road to set it right,’ and I could see that Joe was
in the middle of a good quarrel with all the other farmers about it.

When he had done his story, I asked him about the White Horse, and he
pointed me out the highest of the hills which ran along on our left
hand a mile or two away. There, sure enough, I saw the figure quite
plain; but he didn’t know much about it. Only, he said, he had always
heard tell that it was cut out by King Alfred the Great, who lived
in those parts; and ‘there was a main sight of strange old things up
there on the hill, besides the White Horse; and though he didn’t know
much about how they got there, he was sort of proud of them, and was
glad to pay his pound or two, or double that if it was wanted, to keep
them as they should be;’ “for, you see,” said Joe, “we’ve lived about
here, father and son, pretty nigh ever since King Alfred’s time, which
I reckon is a smartish time ago, though I forget how long.” And though
I think Joe, and parties in the counties generally, set too much store
by such things, and hold their noses much higher than they’ve any need
to do, because their families have never cared to move about, and push
on in the world, and so they know where their great-grandfathers were
born, I couldn’t help feeling there was something in it after all.

And the more I thought of this strange old White Horse, the more it
took hold of me, and I resolved, if I could, while I was down in the
country to learn all about it. I knew, you see, that if I could only
get people to tell me about it, I should be able to carry it all away;
because, besides having a very good memory, I can take down every thing
that is said as fast as most people can speak it, and that’s what gives
me such an advantage over Jem Fisher and Neddy, who spent all the time
it took me to learn shorthand in reading poetry and other rubbish,
which will never help to get them on in the world, or do them a bit of
good that I can see.

Presently we came in sight of a house with farm buildings behind, which
stood some way back from the road; and Joe pulled up opposite a gate
which led into the field before the house.

“Here we are, then,” said he; “just jump out, and open the gate, Dick;
I’d do it, only I can’t trust you with the ribbons.”

It was a beautiful great green pasture-field which we drove into, with
a score of fat sleek cows feeding in it, or lying about chewing the
cud; and Joe was very proud of them, and walked the chestnut along
slowly while he pointed out his favourites to me, especially one
short-horn, whose back he said was like a kitchen-table, though why
she should be any the handsomer for that I can’t say. The house was an
old brick building, with tall chimneys and latticed windows; in front
of it was a nice little flower-garden, with a tall, clipped holly hedge
running round it, so thick that you couldn’t see through; and beyond
that, a kitchen garden and an orchard. Outside the enclosure stood four
such elms as I never saw before, and a walnut-tree nearly as big as
they, with queer great branches drooping close to the ground, on which
some turkeys were sitting. There was only a little wicket-gate in the
holly hedge, and a gravel footpath up to the front door, so we drove
into the farm-yard at the back; and while Joe and his man took care of
the chestnut, I had time to look about, and think what a snug berth Joe
seemed to have fallen upon.

The yard must be sixty yards across, and was full of straw where the
pigs were lying with nothing but their snouts out; lots of poultry
were scratching and pecking about before the barn-doors, and pigeons
were fluttering down amongst them, and then up again to the tops of
the barns and stables, which ran all round the yard. The rick-yard,
full of long stacks of hay, and round stacks of corn, was beyond. A
terrier and spaniel were sleeping in sunny corners, and a grayhound was
stalking about and looking at the pigs; and every thing looked sleepy
and happy, and as if life went easily along at Elm Close Farm.

Presently Joe came out of the stable, carrying his whip, and took me
into the house, calling into the kitchen as we passed to send in dinner
directly. There was nobody in the parlour at first, but I saw that the
table was laid for three; and, before I could look round at the prints
and samples on the wall, Joe’s mother and the dinner came in. She was
a good-looking old lady, dressed in black, with a very white lawn cap
and collar, and was very kind and civil, but a little deaf. Joe bustled
about, and got out I don’t know how many bottles of home-made wine,
clary, and raisin, and ginger; all of which he made me drink, besides
beer, for he said that no one in the vale had such receipts for wine
as his mother. And what with the dairy-fed pork, and black puddings,
and a chicken almost as big as a turkey, and the cheese-cakes and tarts
afterwards, and the hearty welcome and good example which Joe gave me,
I don’t remember when I have made so good a dinner.

The old lady went off directly after dinner, and I could see that Joe
wanted to go and see after his men; so I told him not to mind me,
for I should enjoy loitering about the place better than any thing.
And so I did; first I went into the flower-garden, and watched and
listened to the bees working away so busy in the mignonette, and the
swallows darting up into their nests under the eaves, and then diving
out again, and skimming away over the great pasture; and then round
the kitchen-garden, and into the orchard, where the trees were all
loaded with apples and pears, and so out into a stubble-field at the
back, where there were a lot of young pigs feeding and playing queer
tricks, and back through the farm-yard into the great pasture, where I
lay down on the grass, under one of the elms, and lighted my pipe; and
thought of our hot clerks’ room, and how Jem Fisher and little Neddy
were working away there; and watched a flock of little shiny starlings
hopping up on to the backs of some old south-down wethers who were
feeding near me, and flying backwards and forwards into the old elms
and walnut-trees, talking to one another all the while.

And so the time wore on, till a stout lass in a blue cotton print came
out, and called the cows in to milking; and they all went trooping
slowly by into the farm-yard, some of them just stopping to stare at me
with their mild eyes, and smelling so sweet, that I hadn’t the heart to
go on smoking, and let my pipe out. And after a bit, I followed into
the line of sheds where they were being milked by the lass and a man,
who balanced himself on two legs of the milking-stool, and drove his
head into the cow’s side; and I thought I had never heard a sweeter
sound than the tinkling sound which the milk made in the bright, tin
pails.

I soon got into a talk with the lass, who was very pleasant and free
spoken; and presently, when her pail was full, I lifted it out for her,
all frothing up, and looking not a bit like our London sky-blue; and I
told her I didn’t think I had ever tasted real new milk; so she got me
a long straw, and while she went on milking, I went down on my knees,
and began to suck away through the straw. But I had hardly begun, when
I heard a noise behind, and looking round, there stood Joe, laughing
all over; and by his side a young woman in a broad, straw hat and a
gray jacket; and though, for good manners, she didn’t laugh out like
Joe, I could see it was all she could do to keep from going off too.

Why was I ashamed of being caught? I don’t know, but I was ashamed; and
as I stuck there on my knees in the deep straw with the pail before me
looking at them, the blood rushed up to my head and made my ears sing,
so that I couldn’t hear a word that Joe said. But I could see he did
say something, and then went off into another great roar of laughter;
and the lass and the man left off milking and began laughing too, till
I thought they would have dropped off the stools. Then the young woman
who was with Joe said something to him, and I thought I heard the words
“What a shame!” and “your oldest friend;” and then she caught up a
straw, and came and knelt on the opposite side of the milk-pail, and
began to suck away herself without looking at me. In another moment Joe
plumped down too, clapping me on the back.

“I say,” said he, “start fair! Here, make room for me; you and Lucy
ain’t going to have it all to yourselves,” and he began sucking away
too; and then I recovered myself, and we all went on for a minute, when
Joe took his straw out of his mouth, and said, “This is my sister Lucy,
Dick; there, shake hands over the pail, and then let’s go in to tea.”

So she looked up, and blushed, and gave me her hand, her merry blue
eyes twinkling with mirth, though she tried to keep grave. But I was
all right now, and went off myself, and Joe followed, and then she,
with the clearest, brightest laugh you ever heard; and then the man and
the lass, and by the time we had done, I felt as if I had known them
all for years. But as for Miss Lucy, as we walked away to the house to
tea, I felt as if I could have given her my skin, if she would only
have had a pair of shoes made out of it for her dear little feet.

The old lady was sitting at the tea-table in great force, with plates
of buttered toast and cake, and pots of blackberry and red-currant jam,
and the great loaf all set out ready; and after tea, we three walked
out again till the sun set, and then came in to supper, at which I was
surprised to find myself eating away just as if I had had nothing all
day; country air does give one such an appetite. After supper, the old
lady sat in her chair knitting and telling stories, till she nodded
off and the spectacles fell on to the end of her nose, and her hands
into her lap, but still holding the needles; and every now and then
giving a catch with her head, and making belief to go on for a stitch
or two. And Miss Lucy sat stitching at a patch-work coverlet, fitting
in all sorts of scraps of silk in the prettiest patterns in the world,
and we on the other side of the table watching her, and talking quite
low not to disturb the old lady. But what made it so pleasant was,
that I had pretty near all the talking, for they seemed never tired
of hearing about London, and how people lived there, and what they
thought; especially Miss Lucy, who had never been out of Berkshire in
her life. I thought Joe a great fidget, when soon after nine he began
to walk about and waked his mother, and got the servants in to prayers,
and bustled them off to bed; but I believe it was all because he wanted
to have his pipe, which he wouldn’t smoke in the parlour. So we went
into the kitchen and finished the day there, under half a score of
great brown sides of bacon, and tufts of sweet herbs which hung drying
from the corners of the rack, and opposite to the dresser with its rows
of pewter plates as bright as silver, till I went to bed in sheets
smelling of lavender, and dreamt of Miss Lucy.

I dare say that, though I should never be tired of telling about every
thing that happened to me at Elm Close, some people may get tired of
reading about it. So I shall only begin my story of the next day after
breakfast, when Joe had the trap out again, and carried me off to see
what was doing up on White Horse Hill.

We had a very pleasant drive through the Vale to Uffington, which lies
at the foot of the hill, and here Joe put up the trap, at the Swan,
and we set off on foot to walk up. It was very hot, and the white road
glared as we tramped along it, but very soon we came to broad strips of
turf on each side, and then it was pleasant enough; so we plodded up a
gentle rise called Sour Hill, and crossed the Iceldon or Iggleton way,
which I’ve found out since was an old Roman road; and then the ascent
became quite steep, and every thing was clear hill and down before us,
not a fence to be seen, and a fresh breeze came sweeping over the hill.

The road now became very bad, with ruts in the chalk like
water-courses. On our left hand there was a deep, narrow valley like
a little bay running up into the hill, on the opposite side of which
valley a large wood hung along the steepest part of the hill-side,
which Joe informed me was Uffington wood, a well-known meet for the
hounds; it made me giddy to look at the places which he declared the
huntsman, and any one who wanted to be sure of a good place when the
hounds broke cover, had to ride along.

And now the great, green hill seemed to be hanging right over us,
as we came to a curious round mound on our right hand, up which Joe
scrambled, and I after him, till we both pulled up out of breath on the
flat top, some fifty yards across.

“This is Dragon’s Hill,” said Joe, pulling off his hat and mopping his
face with his handkerchief, “where St. George killed the Dragon in the
old times. Leastways so they says about here, only they calls him King
George instead of Saint George. And this bare place is where his blood
ran out, and nothing’ll grow on it since, not so much as a thistle.”

Of course I knew better than to believe that, but it is a beautiful
place; for just below it another little deep valley, like the one
on the left, only narrower and steeper at the sides, runs right up
into the hill-side. The road we had left winds round the head of this
gorge, for any one to drive along who isn’t particular about breaking
his neck, for the hill is like a wall up above, and down below, with
nothing but a little bank between you and the descent.

“Those are the giants’ seats opposite,” said Joe, pointing across the
valley to a set of beautiful great green slopes, like huge ridges and
furrows, which went sweeping down into the valley one after another
as far as I could see; “and this is the Manger, this great hole in
the hill-side, because it lies right under the old Horse’s nose. Come
along, let’s get up to him; there he is, you see, right above us.”

So we scrambled down the side of Dragon’s Hill, crossed the road,
and then started up a row of steps cut in the turf. I’m sure it must
be twice as steep as the hill in Greenwich Park, and I don’t mind
confessing that I shouldn’t have liked to look round just at first, and
wouldn’t have minded giving myself a help with my hands if I hadn’t
been afraid of Joe’s seeing me and laughing. I should think we must
have gone up two hundred steps, when all of a sudden Joe stopped just
above me, and called out, “Here we are;” and in about four steps I came
to a trench cut into the chalk about two feet deep, which ran up the
hill-side right ahead of us. The chalk in the trench was all hard and
flat, and seemed to have been scraped and brushed up quite lately.

“This is his tail,” said Joe. “Come on; look, they’re scouring him
up above; we’re in luck--I thought they’d have done before this; and
there’s the Squire too with ’em.”

[Illustration]

So I looked up; and there, some way above, I saw a lot of men with
shovels, and besoms, and barrows, cleaning away at the trench, which,
now that I began to look at it, certainly came out more and more like
a horse galloping; and there amongst them, working away as hard as
any one, was a person in yellow leather gaiters, who I saw at once
must be the Squire, though I had never seen a squire before. I own I
had a great prejudice against a country squire when I went down into
Berkshire; which was natural enough, you see, because I had never been
farther from town than Twickenham (except by boat to Margate),
and had belonged to a debating society near Farringdon-market ever
since I left school, where we take in three liberal papers, and once
a week have as good speaking as they get in the House of Commons. I
haven’t been to the debates much lately, myself; but when I was an
active member, we used to have a regular go in about once a quarter
at the unpaid magistracy. How we did give it them! They were bloated
aristocrats, who by the time they were thirty had drunk out all the
little brains they ever had, and spent their time in preserving and
killing game and foxes at the expense of the farmers, and sending every
good man in their villages either to the Bastile (as we called the
workhouse), as a pauper, or to the county jail as a poacher.

Joe and I very nearly quarrelled over one of those debates to which
I took him, like a great gaby as I was, when he came up to see me at
the time of a cattle-show. He would get up to speak, all I could do to
stop him; and began, all red in the face, pitching into one of our best
speakers who had just finished, calling him a cockney, and asking him
what right he had to jaw about squires when he talked about a fox’s
ears and tail, and didn’t know mangold-wurzel from swedes. And then all
our fellows began to shout and hiss, and Joe began to swear, and wanted
to take his coat off, and fight all who had spoken; “one down, and
t’other come on,” as he said. I got him out and took him home; but his
blood was up, and he would go on at our Society, and call us a set of
quill-driving jackanapes. And I couldn’t stand that, so I began at the
landed interest, and said all the bad of them I could think of, about
the Poor-Laws, game preserving, and the Corn-laws. Joe was very near
going off in a huff, but we shook hands over it at last, and agreed
that we neither of us knew much about the sort of life the other led,
and so had better not talk about it as if we did.

Well, this was the first squire I had ever seen, so I looked at him
with all my eyes; and if all squires were like him, I don’t wonder
at Joe’s getting in a passion at our talk in Farringdon-market. I
should think he must be about forty-five years old, and stands not far
short of six feet high; for when he came to stand by Joe, I could see
he was the taller of the two; but he didn’t look so tall quite when
he stood by himself--I suppose because his figure was so good. For
you never saw such a clean made man; he was for all the world like a
well-rounded wedge from his shoulders down, and his neck and head put
on like a statue. He looked just as if he could have jumped the highest
five-barred gate in the Vale, and then have carried it off on his
shoulders, and run up the hill with it. And his face, which was well
browned, was so manly and frank, and his voice so cheery, and he looked
you so straight in the face, that you felt he wasn’t ashamed of any
thing, or afraid of anybody; and so you looked him back and spoke out,
and were twice as good a man at once yourself while you were talking to
him.

Well, when the Squire saw Joe, he stopped working away with his shovel,
and called out to him; and so Joe went up and shook hands with him, and
began talking to him, and in another minute the Squire called for his
coat--a gray tweed shooting-jacket it was--and put it on, and took up
his riding-whip, and told the men to look alive and get their job done,
and then to send up to the Castle for some beer and bread and cheese
which he would order for them.

Then Joe and the Squire walked away along the hill-side talking,
and I went and sat down on a little mound, just above the Horse’s
ears, and watched the men working, and looked at the view. How I did
enjoy myself! The turf was as soft as a feather bed, and as springy
as horsehair; and it was all covered with thistle down, which came
drifting along like snow with the south wind; and all down below the
country looked so rich and peaceful, stretching out for miles and miles
at my feet in the hazy sunshine, and the larks right up overhead sang
so sweetly, that I didn’t know whether to laugh or cry. I should have
liked to have had a turn at the besoms and shovels with the men, who
seemed very good-tempered, only I was too shy, and I couldn’t make out
half they said. So I took out my pipe and lighted it, and sat looking
on at the work, and thinking of nothing.

Presently a gentleman whom I hadn’t noticed, but who was poking about
the place, came and sat down near me. He was dressed in dark clothes,
very quiet; I suppose he was a parson from some of the villages near.
And we began talking about the weather, and what chance there was of
having fine days for the pastime. He was a very grave, elderly man, but
easy and pleasant, and had a keen look in his gray eyes, and a sort of
twinkle about his mouth, which made me put my best leg foremost, and
take care what I said.

Well, when we had done about the weather, thinks I, “This is just the
sort of gentleman to tell me what I want to know about the White Horse
and all the rest of it,” and you’ll see as you go on that I never
made a better guess in my life. So I got my note-book out quietly, so
that he shouldn’t take much notice of what I was about, and began, “I
suppose, Sir,” said I, “that it’s all right about Alfred, and that he
really did cut out this figure after winning a great battle up here?”

“Yes,” said he, “I think so myself, because there has always been a
tradition in the country side that this was so. And where antiquaries
differ, a tradition of this sort may always be pretty safely believed.
Country folk hold on to such stories, and hand them down in a very
curious manner; but you know, I dare say, that it is claimed by some as
a Druidical, or at any rate a British monument, which would make it
several hundred years older at least.”

I didn’t know any thing about it, but why should I tell him so. “I
shouldn’t like to think so, Sir,” said I, “because one wouldn’t care so
much about it if it wasn’t made by the Saxons and their great king. The
Druids don’t seem akin to us somehow; and then one would lose all about
the great battle, which was certainly fought up here, wasn’t it, Sir?”

“I have no doubt about it,” said he; “there are many signs of it--above
all, graves enough to hold the harvest of many battles. You are lying
on one.”

“No! am I really, though?” said I, sitting up and looking at the
ground; “how do you know?”

“Well, it isn’t very hard when the eye gets used to them,” said he;
“there’s another;” and he pointed to a small mound a few yards off,
and just like the one I was sitting on. “That larger mound, too, down
below, across the road, you were on it just now--”

“Yes, Sir,” said I, interrupting him, and pointing at it, “Dragon’s
Hill.”

[Illustration]

“Exactly so,” said he; “that’s another burial-place; a larger and
grander affair, you see, than these. Probably a king or other very
noble person is buried there.”

“The people say, Sir, don’t they,” said I, “that St. George killed the
Dragon there?”

“They do,” said he, “and that his blood made a pool on the top, and
ran down the steps on the other side, where the grass has never grown
since. This is another curious instance of the tenacity of tradition;
but here I think our good folk in the Vale have held on to the name,
or a part of it, and forgotten the meaning, just as they have in the
case of another village over there in Oxfordshire, the name of which is
Stanton Harcourt.”

“How was that, Sir?” said I, when he paused.

“Well,” said he, laughing, “an old man in that village told me that a
battle was fought there, which the English were very near losing, when
the general rode up to one of his captains, named Harcourt, who was in
the thick of it, and called out, ‘Stan’ to un, Harcourt, stan’ to un,
Harcourt;’ and that Harcourt won the battle, and the village has been
called Stanton Harcourt ever since. Now, as to that mound, I believe
it’s right name to be Pendragon’s Hill. Pendragon, you know, is only
a name common to those of the kings of the ancient Britons, who were
chosen leaders in the time of national distress, and means nothing more
than ‘caput regum,’ ‘the chief of kings.’ According to some, ‘Arthur’
is the same or a like word, being ‘Ardh-reg’ or ‘Ard-heer,’ and meaning
‘summus Rex’ (whence the ‘Arviragus’ of Juvenal; but I lay no stress on
this). Now we know of at least three Pendragons. There was Cassibelan,
who was chosen Pendragon at the time of Julius Cæsar’s invasion, Uter
Pendragon, and Arthur Pendragon; which Uter and Arthur were, without
doubt, chosen to resist the Saxons, who had won already the eastern
part of the island. And if Arthur and Pendragon are the same words,
doubtless (as has been well supposed), there were many Arthurs at this
time, one of whom was probably slain in battle and buried here.[2]
For in the Saxon annals we find that Cedric, founder of the West Saxon
kingdom, slew Natan-leod and five thousand men in these parts, which
Natan-leod (as is shown by Mr. Baxter) is ‘Naud-an-ludh,’ or ‘populi
tutela,’ the people’s refuge; in fact, a kindred word to ‘Pendragon,’
or ‘Arthur.’ You see how probable this would be _primâ facie_?” said
he, turning round to me.

My goodness! I couldn’t make out head or tail of his long words, and
was staring at him with my mouth open; but when he turned round I shut
it pretty quick, and looked as wise as I could. “Well, Sir,” said I,
“I hardly know; but it doesn’t look unlikely, does it?”

“Of course not,” said he, quite pleased; “and as the Britons were not
driven from these parts till the middle of the sixth century, I should
put the throwing up of Dragon’s Hill in the beginning, say the first
half, of that century. Now, in the year A.D. 520, according to Gildas
and Bede, Arthur gained his twelfth victory at ‘Mons Badonicus,’ which
might very well be Baydon Hill, which you see over there.” And he
pointed to a hill three or four miles off.

“But then, Sir,” said I, “if he gained the victory, he wasn’t killed
there, I suppose, and so he couldn’t be buried here.”

“But he was killed in battle at last,” said he; “and, as I told you,
there must have been many Arthurs or Pendragons just at that time, and
many battles fought between this and Bath--why, the Britons gained a
battle at Wanborough, over there, as late as A.D. 581.”

“But, Sir,” said I, “if Pendragon was buried down there, wouldn’t
they have been very likely to cut out the horse up here just above,
as another monument, at the same time; and then what becomes of King
Alfred and the Danes?”

“There is no instance of two such monuments over one chief,” answered
he, quite positive; but I thought I saw him give a twinkle with his
mouth, as if he felt I had been pretty near him. “Besides, as I said
before, the tradition as to the White Horse is too strong to be upset
by conjecture.”

“I didn’t mean to conjecture, I’m sure, Sir,” said I; and I thought,
though I didn’t say so, it was he who had been conjecturing pretty
freely, if it came to that. “The battle of Ashdown, Sir, was a very
great battle then,” I went on, for I liked to hear him talk about those
old times, though I didn’t quite understand all he said.

“The greatest battle probably in which Alfred ever was,” said he.

“Please, Sir,” said I, “I hope you won’t think me troublesome, but if
you would only tell me about the battle I should be so much obliged to
you.”

“Sir,” said he, looking at me rather surprised, “it is seldom that
I can get any of the youth of this day to take an interest in these
matters, the study of which would greatly benefit their manners
and morals. I shall be pleased to do what you wish. Are you a good
listener?”

“Yes, Sir,” said I, “you will get tired of talking long before I shall
of listening. And you wouldn’t mind, I hope, my taking notes of the
story?”

“By no means,” said he; “I see you are ready with your pen. Perhaps
I shouldn’t have told you so much about Pendragon and Natan-leod if
I had seen that you were taking me down; but now I will be careful
to give you nothing which is not to be found in the most trustworthy
chroniclers. Are you ready?”

“Yes, Sir,” said I; and then he settled himself in the turf, and pulled
a couple of old brown books out of his long coat-tail pockets, to which
he sometimes referred, and looking out over the Vale, as if he were
travelling in his mind far away from me and every thing about us on the
hill-side, began as follows.

[2] E. Martin Atkins, Esq., of Kingston Lisle, has lately been opening
the barrows which are nearest to the Horse; and the compiler, hearing
that he was about to examine Dragon’s Hill also, wrote to him on the
subject, and suggested how desirable it would be (if any ways possible)
to find the remains of King Bægseek there who was slain at Ashdown. To
which communication the compiler received the following reply. After
mentioning the contents of the other barrows, some clearly Saxon,
others Romano-British, his letter proceeds as to Dragon’s Hill:--

“As for old Bægseek, I should chuck him overboard at once, and assume
that our friend Uter Pendragon’s remains had been originally deposited
here, but that he had been disturbed in his repose by the decapitation
of the barrow, which at some unknown time has undoubtedly taken place.
It is unfortunate, however, that a Roman coin of the time of Constans
turned up from among the débris, and the fragments of pottery also
were chiefly of Roman manufacture, mixed with some of earlier date.
It will therefore perhaps be difficult to reconcile these matters one
with the other; but on turning them over in your mind, you will, I dare
say, _theorize with a very agreeable correctness_!” What is a wretched
compiler to do, who gets such letters from those who should be his
aiders and abettors?




CHAPTER III.


Nearly a thousand years ago, in the year of our Lord 871, the great
battle of Ashdown was fought; but, in order to give you a true idea
of its importance, I must begin my story some years earlier; that is
to say, in the year of our Lord 866. In this year Æthelbert, king of
the West Saxons, died, having ruled his kingdom for five years in
peace, with the love of his subjects; and Æthelred, his next brother,
who succeeded him, buried his body in Sherborne Minster. In this year
Alfred, the younger brother, who afterwards succeeded Æthelred, and was
called Alfred the Great, reached his seventeenth year. In the autumn a
great army of pagan Danes came over to Britain, and landed in that part
of the island which was then called East Anglia, but now Norfolk. These
were not the first Danes who had come over to vex England, but none of
them ever stayed so long, fought so many battles, or did so much harm
(as we should say, speaking according to man’s judgment) as these.

A very curious story is told of why they came over here; and as it goes
at first sight against a good many of our notions of how the world is
governed, and so ought to make us think a little more about the matter,
I shall give it you pretty much as it is told by the old chronicler,
John Brompton.

“There was a man of royal birth in the kingdom of Denmark, named
Lodbroc, who had two sons, Hinguar and Hubba. This man embarked one
day with his hawk in a small boat to catch ducks, and other wild-fowl
on the adjoining sea-coasts and islands. A terrible storm arose, by
which Lodbroc was carried away and tossed for several days on every
part of the ocean. After numberless perils, he was cast ashore on the
coast of Norfolk, near the village of Redham,” (at least that must be
the name, as I read it in Brompton, though I have not been able to
hear of a village of that name on the coast of Norfolk,) “where he was
found having his hawk alone for his companion, and presented to King
Edmund. That king, struck with the manliness of his form, kept him at
his court, and heard from his own mouth the history of his adventures.
He was then associated with Berne, the king’s huntsman, and indulged
in all the pleasures of the chase, for in the exercise of both hunting
and hawking he was remarkably skilful, and succeeded in capturing both
birds and beasts according as he had a mind.” In fact, Lodbroc was the
sort of man to please King Edmund, for the art of capturing birds and
beasts was, next to the art of fighting for one’s home and country,
the art most esteemed amongst the Anglo-Saxons; who acknowledged “that
skill and good fortune in this art, as in all others, are among the
gifts of God, as we also have often witnessed.” But to go on with our
story. “The skill of Lodbroc bred jealousy in the heart of Berne the
huntsman, who one day, as they went out together hunting, unawares
set upon Lodbroc, and having foully slain him, buried his body in the
thickets of the forest. But Lodbroc had a small harrier dog, which he
had bred up from its birth, and which loved him much. While Berne the
huntsman went home with the other hounds, this little dog remained
alone with his master’s body. In the morning, the king asked what had
become of Lodbroc, to which Berne answered that he had parted from him
yesterday in the woods, and had not seen him since. At that moment the
harrier came into the hall and went round wagging its tail, and fawning
on the whole company, but especially on the king; when he had eaten
his fill, he again left the hall. This happened often; until some one
at last followed the dog to see where he went, and having found the
body of the murdered Lodbroc, came and told the story to the king. The
affair was now carefully inquired into, and when the truth was at last
found out, the huntsman was exposed on the sea, without oars, in the
boat which had belonged to Lodbroc. In some days, he was cast ashore
in Denmark, and brought before the sons of Lodbroc; who, putting him
to the torture, inquired of him what had become of their father, to
whom they knew the boat belonged. To this Berne answered,” as one might
have guessed he would answer, he being a liar and cowardly murderer,
“that their father Lodbroc had fallen into the hands of Edmund, King
of East Anglia, by whose orders he had been put to death.” Now, King
Edmund was a wise and righteous man, who “devoutly undertook the
government of the East Angles, and held it with the right hand of
power, always adoring and glorifying God for all the good things which
he enjoyed;”[3] and it is a pity he did not on this occasion remember,
that having safely caught a great scoundrel, the best thing to do with
him was to see him hung out of the way himself; for, by letting him go,
you see, he gave a chance to the devil, who can’t afford to lose such
gentlemen as Berne the huntsman out of the world, and has considerable
grudges against kings like Edmund.

Well, when Hinguar and Hubba heard the tale of Berne the huntsman,
they, like good and true sons, according to the notions of piety then
current amongst the Danes, hastened to fit out a fleet to invade
England, and avenge their father. And their three sisters wove for them
the standard, called the Raven, in one day--which flag waved over many
a bloody field, from Northumbria to Devonshire, until it was taken by
King Alfred’s men, under Odda, the Alderman of Devon, before a certain
castle in that county, which is called Cynuit by Asser, and Kenuith
elsewhere, (the situation of which castle I cannot identify, or the
name,) where were slain King Halfdene, a brother of Hinguar and Hubba,
and 840 Danish warriors. It was said, that when the Danes were about to
gain a battle, a live crow would fly before the middle of the standard;
but if they were to be beaten, it would hang motionless.[4]

So Hinguar and Hubba, as has been said, landed in the country of the
East Angles, in the late autumn, bent on vengeance. King Edmund knew
nothing of the blood-feud between him and these Danish leaders, by
reason of Berne’s lying story, so took no more than the usual measures
for preparing to attack them; but whether it was that they found King
Edmund too strong for them at the time, or for some other reason, they
seem to have wintered there quietly, and to have bought horses, and
made some sort of truce with the East Angles.[5] But in the spring of
the year 867, they crossed the Humber, marched hastily upon York, and
took it.

The kingdom of Northumbria was just the place for the army of Pagans
and the standard Raven at this time; for it was divided against itself.
Osbert, the rightful king, had been playing Tarquin in the house of
Bruern Brocard, one of his chief earls; so his people had cast him out,
and had taken to themselves a king Ælla, of unkingly blood, and the two
were warring against one another when the Danes took York. Late in the
autumn, however, a peace was made between Osbert and Ælla, and they
marched to York; where within the very walls of the city into which
the Northumbrians penetrated, was fought a most bloody battle. In that
fight fell almost all the Northumbrian warriors, and both the kings,
and a multitude of noble men; and the remainder who escaped made peace
with the Pagans.[6] By this time, no doubt, there was small spoil left
for Hinguar and Hubba north of the Humber.

Accordingly, in the year 868, the pagan army, leaving Northumbria,
marched into Mercia, and surprised and took Nottingham. Then Burhred,
King of Mercia, and his witan sent to Æthelred, king of the West
Saxons, to come and help them. And Æthelred and Alfred marched to
Nottingham with the West Saxon power, and with Burhred besieged the
Pagans, there; but they could not force the wall, and there was no
great battle, and Æthelred and Alfred went home with their troops. But
the Pagans, after wintering at Nottingham, made peace with Burhred and
the Mercians; that is to say, such a peace as they loved to make--I
mean a peace till it was worth their while to come again; for in 874
they came back, drove King Burhred over the sea, and subdued the whole
country--and Burhred went to Rome and died there, and his body lies in
St. Mary’s Church at the English School.[7]

In the year 869, “the aforesaid army of Pagans, galloping back to
Northumbria, went to York, and there passed the winter;” or, in the
words of Huntingdon, “remained there cruelly for one year.” And what
sort of a winter was it for the poor Yorkshiremen? “There was again a
great famine, a mortality among men, and a pest among cattle.” Such
is the fate of a divided people which can only make truces with its
oppressors.

In this winter, Hinguar and Hubba seem to have got large
reinforcements from over the sea, headed by two other kings, Bægseeg
and Halfdene their brother, for in the year 870 we find them no longer
surprising a city, and from thence defying their enemies and oppressing
the neighbourhood. Now they march openly and fearlessly across Mercia;
and, the day of vengeance having come, burst upon East Anglia, and take
up their head-quarters at Thetford. And then comes the saddest part of
a sad story. King Edmund, being a king like Josiah, who believed in God
and ruled in righteousness, was not the man to see the desolation of
any part of his people, or to shut himself up in fenced cities while
the pagan cavalry rode through East Anglia--so the aforesaid King
Edmund gathered his men, and “fought fiercely and manfully against
the army. But because the merciful God foreknew that he was to arrive
at the crown of martyrdom, he there fell gloriously. Of his passion
I would fain insert some particulars into our history, that the sons
of men may know and perceive how terrible is Christ the Son of God in
the counsels of men, and with what glorious triumph he adorns those
whom he tries here under the name of suffering, that the saying may
be fulfilled, ‘He is not crowned except he strive lawfully.’ (2 Tim.
ii. 5.)”[8] Such is the lesson which the old monk Simeon, præcentor
of the Church of Durham, gets out of the death and martyrdom of King
Edmund, and I know not where we are to look for a better. Perhaps it
may help us when we think of India[9] to remember with Simeon, how
terrible is Christ the Son of God in the counsels of men, and with
what glorious triumph he adorns those whom he tries here under the
name of suffering. For Hinguar and Hubba took the wounded king on
the field of battle, and tied him to a tree, because he chose to die
sooner than give over his people to them, and there shot him through
the body with their arrows.[10] But his people got the body and buried
it at Bradoriesunyrthe, now called St. Edmund’s Bury, or Bury St.
Edmunds;[11] and many miracles were wrought at his tomb, and he was
canonized--at which honour let all Englishmen rejoice, the earth having
as much need as ever of many such kings and saints.

And they were rare then as now, and then as now men went their own
way, and not God’s way, and cut out their own work instead of taking
his. For “when King Edmund was slain, his brother Edwold, dreading
the pleasures of the world, and seeing that a hard lot had fallen
on himself and his brother, retired to the monastery of Carnelia in
Dorsetshire, near a clear well which St. Augustine had formerly brought
out of the earth by prayer, to baptize the people in, and there he
led a hermit’s life on only bread and water.”[12] Yes! and no doubt
thought himself righteous and despised others--and left the kingdom
which God had given him to the Pagans, who “subdued all the land and
destroyed all the ministers they came to,” which Edmund his brother had
built--“and that same time they came to Medeshamstede, and burned and
beat it down, slew abbot and monks, and all that place which before was
full rich, they reduced to nothing,”[13] while Edwold, who should have
been there with the remnant of the East Angles, to make his last stand,
like a true shepherd of his people, was eating his bread and drinking
his water in peace, by a clear well near the monastery of Carnelia in
Dorsetshire.

And now the Pagan kings, “with a new army, very great, like a flowing
river which carries all along with it,”[14] having doubtless been
reinforced again from over the sea, where the story of their victories
had spread far and wide, were looking about for some new field for
plunder and murder. The whole north and east of England was a desolate
wilderness behind them; London was in ruins, and Kent had been harried
over and over again by their brethren the sea-kings. But some thirty
miles up the Thames was a fair kingdom, stretching far away west,
down to the distant sea. This was Wessex, the kingdom of the West
Angles, over which Æthelred, the brother of Alfred, was now ruling, and
entering on the sixth year of his reign. The kingdom had had peace for
ten years, and was full of royal burgs, and rich pastures, with cattle
and horses, and sheep. Perhaps Hinguar and Hubba remembered the leaguer
of Nottingham three years before, and how the West Angles, with their
king and his brother, had hemmed them in and watched them there through
a long summer.

In the early years of their inroad, the Pagans would not have dared
to brave a united people with Æthelred for king; but they had now
grown bold from success, and were in numbers so great that “by reason
thereof they could not advance together, but went by different roads.”
So in an early month of the year 871, with their usual swiftness, they
marched up the Thames valley and seized on Reading, a royal burg, and
the then easternmost city of note in Wessex. Reading is situate on the
south bank of the Thames and on the north bank of the Kennet, at the
confluence of the two rivers; and, while part of the Pagan host made a
rampart between the rivers, to protect their camp and the town which
they had taken, a large force, on the third day after their arrival,
began scouring the country for plunder, under two of their earls.

But the men of Wessex had increased and multiplied as well as their
cattle, and Æthelwulf, Alderman of Berkshire, was a man “who raged as
a lion in battle.” So Æthelwulf, with what men he could get together,
fought with the two earls at Englefield, though he had but a small
band of Christians with him. But he cheered his men, saying to them,
“though they attack us with the advantage of more men we may despise
them, for our commander Christ, is braver than they.”[15] Whereupon the
men of Wessex buckled to their work under the oaks of Englefield Chase
(afterwards beloved by the great Queen Bess), and there discomfited
the pagans very sore, and slew one of the two earls. In one of the
old chroniclers, there are a few lines which may partly account for
Æthelwulf’s victory; “their two consuls,” says Æthelwerd, “forgetting
that they were not on board their fleet, rode proudly through fields
and meadows on horseback, which nature had denied them;” possibly
therefore these were the new comers, who had just joined the Pagan army
and were not used to horses or landfighting.

Within the next three days King Æthelred and his brother Alfred came
up from the west, each leading a strong band of West Saxon warriors,
and joined Æthelwulf; and on the fourth day they attacked the Pagans at
Reading. Those who were outside the rampart they cut to pieces, and at
first had the vantage; but the Pagans came out with all their forces,
and after great slaughter had been made on either hand, and the brave
Æthelwulf had been slain, “the Pagans had possession of the place of
death.”[16] Thus the chronicle states it; probably the men of Wessex
were grievously beaten, and went back with their king, in confusion,
along the chalk hills to the other end of Berkshire, pursued by Bægseeg
and Halfdene, the two lately arrived Danish kings, with the strength of
the Pagan host. I suppose that Hinguar and Hubba stayed at Reading, to
hold the place of safety; for neither of them were at Ashdown.

But every mile as they fell back added strength to Æthelred and Alfred,
as bands of men came up from the rear; from the broad Wiltshire plains
over the Kennet at Hungerford, and along the chalk hills from Swindon
and Ashbury; from the vales of the Kennet and the Thames on either
flank; and a few perhaps already from Glostershire and Oxfordshire,
where the news was doubtless spreading like the wind. So Æthelred and
his host turned to bay at Ashdown, and set the battle in array against
the pagan kings.

There is some question between antiquaries as to where the exact site
of this battle is. It must however, it seems to me, be somewhere in the
western part of Berkshire; for it is quite impossible that Æthelred and
Alfred could have fought at Reading, at Ashdown, and at Basing, as they
unquestionably did, within three weeks, if we are to look for Ashdown
battle-field either at Ashdown forest, in Essex, or at Ashendon, in
the hundred of Bernwood in Buckinghamshire, which are the only sites
out of Berkshire claiming this honour, and supported by a tittle of
authority. Besides, even supposing these three battles could have been
fought in the time, yet the battle of Reading, having gone against the
Saxons, (as to which every chronicler agrees,) is it likely that they
should have retired _past_ the town and stronghold of the Danes, either
northeast into Buckinghamshire, or southeast into Sussex, leaving the
whole of Wessex open to the enemy, instead of falling back westward
into Wessex, and so covering their own homes? It is perfectly absurd to
suppose this, Alfred being one of their generals; and how such ancient
and venerable persons as Bishops Kennet and Leland can have talked such
nonsense, is hard to say; unless, indeed, they were born, the one in
Sussex, the other in Buckinghamshire, in which case it is of course
excusable, nay, justifiable in them; but of this I know nothing.

As to the Berkshire sites, I don’t see any reason for troubling you
with their several titles. I am myself satisfied that the battle was
fought here; but all the sites are somewhere on this range of chalk
hills, of which the old White Horse is king. So now we will turn to the
account of the great battle in the old chroniclers.

[Illustration]

“About four days after the battle at Reading, King Æthelred and Alfred,
his brother, fought against the whole army of the Pagans at Ashdown.
And they were in two bodies; in the one were Bægseeg and Halfdene the
Pagan kings, and in the other were the earls.” “Now the Christians
had determined that King Æthelred with his men should attack the two
Pagan kings, but that Alfred his brother with his men, should take the
chance of war against the earls. Things being so settled, the king
remained a long time in prayer, hearing the mass, and said he would
not leave it till the priest had done, nor abandon the protection of
God for that of men. And so he did, which afterwards availed him much
with the Almighty, as we shall declare more fully in the sequel. But
the Pagans came up quickly to the fight. Then Alfred, though holding a
lower authority, as I have been told by those who were there and would
not lie, could no longer support the troops of the enemy unless he
retreated or charged upon them without waiting for his brother; so he
marched out promptly with his men in a close column and gave battle.”
“He too,” as Simeon says, “knowing without a doubt that victory would
not lie with a multitude of men, but in the pity and mercy of
God,” and seeing also that, mass or no mass, the Pagans must not be
allowed to get between him and his brother. “But here I must inform
those who are ignorant of the fact, that the field of battle was not
equal for both armies. The Pagans occupied the higher ground, and the
Christians came up from below. There was also in that place a single
stunted thorn-tree, which I myself have seen with my own eyes. Around
this tree the opposing hosts came together with loud shouts from all
sides, the one to pursue their wicked course, the other to fight for
their lives, their dearest ties, and their country.” “In the midst of
the fight, and when Alfred was hard pressed,”--according to Brompton,
for the older chroniclers do not mention this,--“the king came up with
his fresh forces.” “And when both hosts had fought long and bravely,
at last the Pagans, by God’s judgment, could no longer bear the attack
of the Christians, and having lost great part of their men, took to a
disgraceful flight, and all the Pagan host pursued its flight not only
until night, but the next day, even until they reached the stronghold
from which they had come out. The Christians followed, slaying all
they could reach until it became dark.”[17] “And the flower of the
Pagan youth were there slain, so that neither before nor since was
ever such destruction known since the Saxons first gained Britain by
their arms.” “There fell in that battle King Bægseeg and these earls
with him; that old Earl Sidroc, to whom may be applied that saying ‘the
ancient of evil days,’ and Earl Sidroc the younger, and Earl Osbern,
and Earl Frœna, and Earl Harold; who, with their men, choosing the
broad and spacious way, went down into the depths of the lake;” or, let
us perhaps hope not, old monk Simeon, seeing that they died gallantly
in harness, and that, as you yourself add in the next sentence, “they
knew not the way of teaching nor understood its paths; it was kept far
away from their faces.” It is fair to add that Brompton states that
Æthelred slew Bægseeg with his spear, and another Pagan of note with
his sword, after, he got up to the fight; but the older chroniclers do
not mention this.[18]

To finish briefly the history of the rest of the year 871, fourteen
days after the battle of Ashdown, Æthelred and Alfred fought another
battle with the Pagans (probably with that part which had remained
in garrison at Reading, with Hinguar and Hubba, and the relics of
Halfdene’s army), at Basing, which seems to have been undecided; and
two months afterwards another at Merton. After which, in the summer,
reinforcements came from beyond sea, and joined the Pagans; King
Æthelred died, and Alfred fought before the winter four more pitched
battles. So, as the Saxon Chronicle sums up, “in this year nine general
battles were fought against the army in the kingdom south of the
Thames; besides which, Alfred, the king’s brother, and single aldermen
and king’s thanes, oftentimes made attacks on them which were not
numbered, and slew of them within the year one king and nine earls.”
This was not what the Pagans reckoned on; they liked fighting very
much in reason, as an accompaniment of spoiling a country, and did it
well; but to be fighting nine pitched battles in a year, hemmed in in
one corner of a rich kingdom (for they never got farther than a few
miles into Wiltshire), and getting no spoil even there, was not to
their taste; so in the winter they made truce with Alfred, and took
themselves off to their old haunts in Mercia and Northumbria, and did
not return for five years.

This year, A.D. 871, is a year for Berkshire men to be proud of, for
on them fell the brunt of that fiery trial; and their gallant stand
probably saved England a hundred years of Paganism. For had they
given way at Ashdown, and the reinforcements from over the sea come
to a conquering, instead of to a beaten army in the summer, there was
nothing to stop the Pagans between Reading and Exeter. The other eight
battles were skirmishes in comparison with this one; they scarcely
occupy five lines each in the chroniclers, and out of the king and nine
Pagan earls who were slain within the year, six fell at Ashdown. It was
Alfred’s crowning mercy; and so he felt it to be, and in memory of it
he caused his army (tradition says, on the day after the battle) to
carve the White Horse, the standard of Hengist, on the hill-side just
under the Castle, where it stands as you see until this day.

       *       *       *       *       *

“Thank you, Sir,” said I, when he paused, “what a grand story it makes!
And are those the real words of the old chroniclers, as you call them,
Sir, which you used?”

“Yes,” said he, “almost every word is simply a translation from one
or other of them, but the greater part is taken from the Chronicle of
Asser, who was a contemporary and intimate friend of Alfred, and a very
learned and pious ecclesiastic.”

“I suppose they were; mostly priests and monks who wrote the Chronicles
then, Sir, for they don’t read at all like our modern histories. They
seem a much more religious sort of books.”

“Don’t call them religious books,” said he, “it puts one in mind of
religious newspapers,--the greatest curse of our times. Yes, people
sneer at the old English chroniclers now-a-days, and prefer the Edda,
and all sorts of heathen stuff, to them; but they are great books,
Sir, for those who have eyes for them; godly books is the name for
them, written by God-fearing men, who were not ashamed of the faith
which was in them;--men who believed, Sir, that a living God was ruling
in England, and that in his name one of them might defy a thousand.
Your historians, now-a-days, Sir, believe that Providence (for they
dare not talk of God) is on the side of the strongest battalion.
There’s some difference, when you come to think of it, between the two
creeds, Sir.”

The old gentleman looked at me quite fierce, so I made all the haste I
could to change the subject.

“Don’t you think it very curious, Sir, that the figure should have
lasted all this time?” said I; “because you see, Sir, if you or I were
to cut a trench, two feet or so deep, up here, on the side of the hill,
and stamp down the chalk ever so hard, it would be all filled up and
grown over in a few years.”

“You are not the first person who has made that remark,” said he. “In
the year 1738, an antiquary, of the name of Francis Wise, who lived
at Oxford, visited the hill, and wrote a letter on the subject to Dr.
Mead, the most learned antiquary of that day. First he speaks of the
figure of the horse as ‘being described in so masterly a manner that it
may defy the painter’s skill to give a more exact description of the
animal.’”

“How could he talk like that, Sir?” said I; “why the figure isn’t a bit
like----”

“You are as bad as Camden,” said he, “who talks of I know not what
shape of a horse fancied on the side of a whitish hill; but the truth
is, it is a copy of the Saxon standard, which, of course, was a rude
affair. However, Wise, whom I was telling you of, goes on:--

“When I saw it, the head had suffered a little and wanted reparation;
and the extremities of his hinder legs, from their unavoidable
situation, have by the fall of rains been filled up in some measure
with the washings from the upper parts; so that, in the nearest view of
him, the tail, which does not suffer the same inconvenience, and has
continued entire from the beginning, seems longer than his legs. The
supplies, which nature is continually affording, occasion the turf to
crumble and fall off into the white trench, which in many years’ time
produces small specks of turf, and not a little obscures the brightness
of the Horse; though there is no danger from hence of the whole figure
being obliterated, for the inhabitants have a custom of ‘scouring the
Horse,’ as they call it; at which time a solemn festival is celebrated,
and manlike games with prizes exhibited, which no doubt had their
original in Saxon times in memory of the victory.”[19]

“Scouring the Horse! yes, of course,” said I, “that is what they are
doing now, and the games are to come off to-morrow.”

“Exactly so,” said he, “but you will like to hear how Wise goes on:--

“If ever the genius of King Alfred exerted itself (and it never failed
him in his greatest exigencies), it did remarkably so upon account
of this trophy. The situation of his affairs would not permit him
to expend much time, nor his circumstances much cost, in effecting
one,” (truly, for he had six more pitched battles to fight between
April and November.) “His troops, though victorious, were harassed
and diminished by continual duty; nor did the country afford, to any
man’s thinking, materials proper for a work of this kind. Though he
had not therefore the opportunity of raising, like other conquerors, a
stupendous monument of brass or marble, yet he has shown an admirable
contrivance, in erecting one magnificent enough, though simple in its
design--executed, too, with little labour and no expense--that may
hereafter vie with the Pyramids in duration, and perhaps exist when
these shall be no more.”

“But, dear me, Sir,” said I, “how can the White Horse vie with the
Pyramids in duration? Why, the Pyramids were built----”

“Never mind when they were built,” said he; “don’t you see the old
antiquary is an enthusiast? I had hoped you were one also.”

“Indeed, Sir, I am very anxious to hear all you can tell me,” said I,
“and I won’t interrupt again.”

“Well, as to the scouring, Wise says:--

“The ceremony of scouring the Horse, from time immemorial, has been
solemnized by a numerous concourse of people from all the villages
round about. I am informed, though the Horse stands in the parish of
Uffington, yet other towns claim, by ancient custom, a share of the
duty upon this occasion. Since, therefore, this noble antiquity is now
explained, and consequently the reason of the festival, it were to
be wished that, in order to prevent for the future its falling into
oblivion, some care was taken of the regulation of the games, and
that they were restored to their ancient splendour, of which, without
question, they are fallen much short. I know that these rites are
cavilled at and maligned by the more supercilious part of mankind;
but the dislike to them seems to be founded merely upon the abuse of
them to riot and debauchery, which I intend by no means to justify
or excuse. The practice of the best and wisest states, whose maxims
we approve and profess to follow, is sufficient authority for their
use. The liberty we so justly boast, and which ought to be a common
blessing to all, pleads loudly for them. The common people, from their
daily labour, stands at least in as much need of proper intervals of
recreation as their superiors, who are exempt from it, and therefore
in all free states have been indulged in sports most suited to their
genius and capacity. And if manlike games contribute any thing
towards the support of the natural bravery of these, who are to be our
bulwark and defence in times of danger, they cannot be more seasonably
revived than at this juncture, when, through the general luxury and
dissoluteness of the age, there was never more likelihood of its
being extinguished. Besides all this, from hence a superior influence
diffuseth itself through the better sort, who are supposed to enter
further into the intention of these solemnities; for which reason it
is, that to perpetuate to posterity the remembrance of great men, and
of great actions, has been always recommended, as a proper incentive to
virtue. Customs of very trifling import, some ridiculous in themselves,
others owing to causes equally ridiculous, are oftentimes kept up by
Englishmen with much zeal and tenacity; and shall the greatest prince
that this isle was ever blessed with, and the greatest action of that
prince’s life, be in danger of being forgot, through the neglect of a
solemnity, the only one, perhaps, that was ever instituted, at least,
that is now preserved, to his honour?”[20]

I didn’t say a word now, though he seemed to have finished.

“Well,” said he, after a minute, “have you nothing to say? You’re very
glad that it’s over, I suppose?”

“No, Sir, indeed I am not,” said I; “but I am very much obliged to you
for your kindness in telling me all that you have.”

“You are a very intelligent young man, Sir,” said he; “most young
fellows of your age would have been bored to death half-an-hour ago,
even if they hadn’t managed to run off altogether, and so they would
have lost a good lesson in English history--not that they would have
cared much for that though. But now, I dare say you are getting hungry.
Let us go up and see what they are doing in the Castle, and I shall be
very glad if you will do me the honour of lunching with me.”

“Well,” thought I, as we got up from the turf, “there are not many
better things for getting a man on than being a good listener. Here is
a very learned old gentleman who doesn’t know my name, and I have got
the length of his foot, and he has asked me to luncheon, just because I
have been listening to his old stories. I wonder where the lunch is to
be though? he spoke of a Castle, perhaps he lives in it--who knows?”

So we strolled away together up over the brow of the hill.

[3] See Simeon, A.D. 870.

[4] See Chronicle of St. Neot, A.D. 878.

[5] See Saxon Chron. and Asser, A.D. 866.

[6] See Asser, A.D. 867.

[7] See Saxon Chron. and Huntingdon, A.D. 874.

[8] See Simeon, A.D. 870.

[9] N. B. This was written in October, 1857.

[10] Here is Robert of Gloster’s account of the martyrdom:--

    “So that atte laste to Estangle agen hym come:
    Ther hii barned and robbede and that fole to grounde slowe;
    And as wolves among ssep reulych hem to drowe,
    Seynt Edmond was tho her kyng, and tho he sey that delvol cas
    That me morthred so that fole, and non amendement n’as,
    He ches levere to deye hym-sulf, that such soreve to ysey--
    He dude hym vorth among ys ton, n’olde he nothyng fle.
    Hii nome hym and scourged hym, and suthe naked hym bounde
    To a tre, and to hym ssote, and made hym mony a wounde,
    That the arewe were on hym tho thycke, that no stede n’as byleved.
    Atte laste hii martred hym, and smyte of ys heved.”

                               _Robert of Gloster’s Chronicle_, p. 263,
                                     _apud Thomas Hearne_. Ed. 1724.


[11] See Saxon Chronicle, and Huntingdon, A.D. 870.

[12] See Brompton, A.D. 870.

[13] See Sax Chron., A.D. 870.

[14] See Huntingdon, A.D. 871.

[15] See Simeon, A.D. 871.

[16] See Saxon Chronicle, A.D. 871.

[17] See Asser, A.D. 871.

[18] This is Robert of Gloster’s account of the Battle:--

    “The Kyng and Alfred ys brother nome men ynowe,
    Mette hem, and a batayle smyte up Assesdowne--
    Ther was mony moder chyld, that sone lay ther doune--
    The batayle ylaste vorte-nygt, and ther were aslawe
    Vyf dukes of Dene-march, ar hii wolde wyth drawe,
    And mony thousende of other men, and tho’ gonne hii to fle;
    Ac hii adde alle ybe assend, gyf the nyght n’adde y bee.

                                     _Robert of Gloster, p. 263,
                                    apud Thomas Hearne. Ed. 1724._”


[19] Wise’s Letter to Dr. Mead, “concerning some Antiquities in
Berkshire,” ed. 1, pp. 25, 26.

[20] Wise’s Letter, p. 31.




CHAPTER IV.


“Well, here’s the Castle, you see,” said he, when we had walked a few
hundred yards, and were come quite to the top of the hill.

“Where, Sir?” said I, staring about. I had half expected to see an
old stone building with a moat, and round towers and battlements, and
a great flag flying; and that the old gentleman would have walked
across the drawbridge, and cried out, “What ho! warder!” and that we
should have been waited upon at lunch by an old white-headed man in
black velvet, with a silver chain, and keys round his waist. Somehow,
the story of the battle, and all the talk about Pendragon and Arthur,
coming upon the back of the farm-house, and the out of the way country
life, which was so strange to me, had carried me into a sort of new
world; and I shouldn’t have been much surprised to see a dragon
running about the hill, though I should have been horribly frightened.

“I can’t make up my mind about this Castle,” he went on, without
noticing me; “on two sides it looks like a regular Roman castrum, and
Roman remains are found scattered about; but then the other sides are
clearly not Roman. The best antiquaries who have noticed it call it
Danish. On the whole, I think it must have been seized and occupied in
succession by the lords of the country for the time being; and each
successive occupier has left his mark more or less plainly. But, at any
rate, you see it is a magnificent work.”

“Yes, Sir,” said I, “no doubt;” though I own I was a good deal
disappointed. For what do you think the Castle is? Up at the very
top of the hill, above the White Horse, there is a great flat space,
about as big as Lincoln’s Inn Fields, only not the same shape, because
it is only square on two sides. All round this space, there is a
bank of earth, eight or ten feet high in some places, but lower at
others. Then, outside, there is a great, broad, deep ditch; it must be
twenty-five feet from the top of the inner bank to the bottom of the
ditch; and outside that again, is another large bank of earth, from
the foot of which the downs slope away on every side. But the banks and
ditch are all grown over with turf, just like the rest of the downs,
and there isn’t even a single stone, much less a tower, to be seen.
There are three entrances cut through the double banks, one on the
west, one on the southeast, and the third at the northeast side, which
was the one through which we entered.

But if there were no warders and seneschals and drawbridges, there was
plenty of life in the Castle. The whole place seemed full of men and
women, and booths and beasts, and carts and long poles; and amongst
them all were the Squire and Joe, and two or three farmers, who I
afterwards found out were Committee-men, trying to get things into
some sort of order. And a troublesome job they were having of it. All
the ground was parcelled out for different purposes by the Committee,
and such parts as were not wanted for the sports, were let at small
rents to any one who wanted them. But nobody seemed to be satisfied
with his lot. Here a big gypsy, who wouldn’t pay any rent at all, was
settling his cart and family, and swinging his kettle, on a bit of
ground, which the man who owned the pink-eyed lady had paid for. There
a cheap-Jack was hustling a toyman from Wantage, and getting all his
frontage towards the streets, (as they called the broad spaces which
were to be kept clear for the people to walk along.) In another place,
a licensed publican was taking the lot of a travelling showman into his
skittle-alley. Then there were old women who had lost their donkeys
and carts, and their tins of nuts and sacks of apples; and donkeys who
had lost their old women, standing obstinately in the middle of the
streets, and getting in everybody’s way; and all round, saws and axes
and hammers were going, and booths and stalls were rising up.

I shouldn’t have liked to have had much to do with setting them all
straight, and so I told Joe, when he came up to us, after we had been
looking on at all the confusion for a minute or two. For most of the
men were very rough-looking customers, like the costermongers about
Covent Garden and Clare Market, and I know that those huckstering,
loafing blades are mostly terrible fellows to fight; and there wasn’t
a single policeman to look like keeping order. But Joe made light
enough of it--he was always such a resolute boy, and that’s what made
me admire him so--and said, “For the matter of that, if they were ten
times as rough a lot, and twice as many, the Squire and the farmers
and their men would tackle them pretty quick, without any blue-coated
chaps to help! Aye, and nobody knows it better than they, and you’ll
see they’ll be all in nice order before sundown, without a blow struck;
except amongst themselves, perhaps, and that’s no matter, and what
they’re used to. But now, you come in,” said Joe, turning towards
one of the large publicans’ booths, which was already finished, “the
Committee have got a table here, and we must dine, for we shan’t be
home these four hours yet, I can see.”

“Sir,” said my new friend to Joe, drawing himself up a bit, but very
politely; “this gentleman is my guest. He has done me the honour of
accepting my invitation to luncheon.”

“Oh! beg pardon, Sir, I’m sure,” said Joe, staring; “I didn’t know that
Dick had any acquaintance down in these parts. Then,” said he to me,
“I shall take my snack with the rest presently; you’ll see me about
somewhere, when it’s time to get back.” Joe went back into the crowd,
and I followed the old gentleman.

We went into the booth, which was a very big one, made of strong,
double sail-cloth, stretched over three rows of fir poles, the middle
row being, I should say, sixteen or eighteen feet high. Just on our
right, as we entered from the street, was the bar, which was made with
a double row of eighteen-gallon casks, full of ale, along the top of
which boards were laid, so as to make a counter. Behind the bar the
landlord and landlady, and a barmaid, were working away, and getting
every thing into order. There were more rows of large casks, marked XX
and XXX, ranged upon one another against the side of the booth, and
small casks of spirits hooped with bright copper, and cigar boxes, and
a table covered with great joints of beef and pork, and crockery and
knives and forks, and baskets full of loaves of bread, and lettuces and
potatoes. It must have cost a deal of money to get it all up the hill,
and set the booth up. Beyond the bar was a sort of inner room, partly
screened from the rest of the booth by a piece of sail-cloth, where a
long table was laid out for luncheon, or “nunching,” as the boots, who
was doing waiter for the occasion, called it. The rest of the booth,
except a space before the bar which was kept clear for casual customers
to stand about in, was set about with rough tables and forms. We got
a capital dinner; for the landlord knew my entertainer, and was very
civil, and brought us our ale himself and poured it out, making an
apology because it hadn’t had quite time to fine down, but it would be
as clear as a diamond, he said, if we would please to call in to-morrow.

After we had done, we went round behind the booth, where some rough
planking had been put up to serve for stalls, and the boots, in his
waiter’s jacket, brought out the old gentleman’s cob.

“Peter,” said he, when he had mounted, “here is sixpence for you; and
now mind what you are at, and don’t get drunk and disgrace yourself up
on the hill.”

Peter, who seemed to be very much afraid of the old gentleman, kept
pulling away at his forelock, and hunching up his shoulders, till we
turned the corner of the booth.

“Now I must be riding home,” said my friend, “but if you like just to
walk round with me, I will show you the site of the battle.”

So I thanked him, and walked along by the side of his cob, and he
rode out of the entrance we had come in by, and then round the outer
earthwork of the castle. As we passed along, the inner bank rose high
up on our right hand, and we could just see the tops of the highest
booths above it.

“You see what a strong place it must have been before gunpowder was
invented,” said the old gentleman; “and here, you see, is the second
entrance; and this road which we are upon is the Ridgeway, one of the
oldest roads in England. How far it once extended, or who made it, no
man knows; but you may trace it away there along the ridge of the downs
as far as you can see, and, in fact, there are still some sixty miles
of it left. But they won’t be left long, I fear, Sir, in this age which
venerates nothing.”

“I don’t see much fear of that, Sir,” said I, “after it has lasted so
long already.”

“No fear, Sir!” said he, “why miles of it have been ploughed up within
my memory. God meant these downs, Sir, for sheep-walks, and so our
fathers left them; but within the last twenty years would-be wise men
have found that they will grow decent turnips and not very bad oats.
Well, they plough them up, find two inches of soil only, get one crop
out of them, and spoil them for sheep. Next year, no crops. Then comes
manure, manure, manure, nothing but expense; not a turnip will trouble
himself to grow bigger than a reddish under a pennyworth of guano or
bones. The wise men grumble and swear, but the downs are spoiled.”

“But that will all cure itself then, Sir,” said I; “they won’t plough
up any more, if it doesn’t pay; and then the Ridgeway won’t be touched!”

“They are all mad for ploughing, Sir, these blockhead farmers; why,
half of them keep their sheep standing on boards all the year round.
They would plough and grow mangold-wurzel on their fathers’ graves.
The Tenth Legion, Sir, has probably marched along this road; Severus
and Agricola have ridden along it, Sir; Augustine’s monks have carried
the Cross along it. There is that in that old mound and ditch which
the best turnips and oats in the world (if you could get them) can’t
replace. There are higher things in this world, Sir, than indifferent
oats and d--d bad turnips.”

The old gentleman was all in a blaze again; he brought down his cane
sharply on to the cob’s neck, which made him caper up and jump off
along the Ridgeway, and it was a hundred yards before they drew up. I
followed, thinking that he couldn’t be a clergyman after all, to be
swearing like that about nothing. When I got up to him, however, he was
quite cool again. He had stopped just below the western entrance to the
Castle, and the ground fell rapidly in front of us.

“Now, you can’t have a better point than this,” said he; “you remember
what I told you about the armies. The Danes held the higher ground,
that is, Uffington Castle, up here, behind us. Alfred, with his
division of the Saxon army, lay over there, in that valley to the
left, where you see the great wood in the middle of the down. That is
Ashdown Park, Lord Craven’s seat, and just on the edge of it there is
a circular earthwork, which is called Alfred’s camp. Aubrey says that
in his time it was ‘almost quite defaced, by digging for the Sarsden
stones to build my Lord Craven’s house in the park;’ but you may still
find it if you look. Then, over there, on that point, a mile or more
away to the right, is a camp called Hardwell Camp, where Æthelred lay.
The crown of the slope you see along which the Ridgeway runs, is midway
between the Saxon camps.

“In the early spring morning, the low call to arms passes round the
height; the Danish host, marshalled behind the high earthworks, breaks
over them, like an overflowing lake, and rushes down the slope.
Alfred’s division of the Saxon army is already on foot, and there he
sits, the sickly stripling on the white horse, untried save in one
luckless fight. How will he guide such a battle? See, his host is in
motion; scouts fly out, riding for life across to Æthelred’s camp.
‘Come up, my brother! the Pagan is upon us--while I live they shall
not divide us--I will hold the crest of the Ridgeway, come life, come
death.’ The vans are together with a wild shout, squadron by squadron
the hosts close up, the fight sways slowly backwards and forwards,
the life’s blood of a brave man pays for every inch won or lost. The
Saxons are but one to three, the Pagans slowly overlap them--are on
their flanks. The white horse and his rider dash from side to side,
faster and faster, as the over-matched Christians faint, reel, give
back--now here, now there, along the line. When will the mass be over?
Cut it short, as thou art Saxon man, oh priest! and get thee to sword
and buckler.

“At last they come, Æthelred and his host--they are upon the right
flank of the Pagan, and the fight is restored; and with many an ebb and
pause, but steadily, through the long morning hours, rolls up the hill
towards the camp and the fatal thorn.”

“Is that the old thorn-tree, then, do you think, Sir?” said I, pointing
to one which was growing by itself some way off.

“I fear not, Sir, I fear not; the ‘unica spinosa arbor’ is gone. It
must have stood somewhere up here, on the slope just below the Castle,
the stronghold of the Danish robbers. Here the grim Pagan turns to
bay for the last time. King Bægseeg lies dead, a hundred yards below;
by his side his standard-bearer and Earl Frœna; Halfdene is still
unhurt, but near him Osbert totters under his shield; Harold can
scarce back his charger, and the life-blood trickles slowly down his
leg, and falls, drop by drop, on the trampled turf, as they still make
front against Æthelred yonder--there on the right. But here, here the
field must be won! This way, you Saxon men, kings-thane, and alderman!
Whoever hath stout heart and whole body left.

“It is the old sea-king, Sidroc, ‘the ancient one of evil days;’ mark
him, as he bestrides his black war-horse, there by the old twisted
thorn. His heavy sword drips with blood, his sword-arm is steeped in
blood to the elbow--the dint of long and fierce battle is on horse
and man; but the straight thin lips are set like flint in the midst
of that gray beard, and the eyes glow and gleam under that fearful
brow--eyes that have never quailed before conquering foe, or softened
to the fallen--lips that have never opened to say the word ‘Spare.’
By his side the young Sidroc, grim son of grim sire. Ashdown crows
must feast on those eyes, and Ashdown wolves pick those bones, if the
Pagans are to be beaten this day. Round them rally the Danes as they
are driven up the slope. Again and again the advancing Saxons reel
back from the stunted thorn, before the shock of the two Boersirkir.
He comes! it is the sickly prince, the stripling on the white
horse, trampling fetlock-deep in blood. Round him a chosen band of
yellow-bearded men of Wessex. One moment’s pause, and they meet in a
last death-grapple. Bite, Saxon blade; pierce, Saxon spear! Think of
your homes, my countrymen; think of the walls of Reading, of Ethelwulf
and his last war-cry, ‘Our commander, Christ, is braver than they!’
The black horse is down; young Sidroc springs over the brute, lashing
out in death agony, and covers his father. His head is cleft to the
chin--a half-armed gaunt cowherd drives his spear through the chest of
the old sea-king. Away over their bodies up the hill go white horse,
and stripling prince, and yellow-bearded men; rushing through the camp
gate, scrambling over the banks pell-mell with the flying Pagan. The
camp is ours; now slay while light is left--for there is no shelter for
a Pagan between this and Reading. ‘Then were the horse-hoofs broken by
the means of the prancings, of the prancings of their mighty ones. Oh
my soul, thou hast trodden down strength!’”

The old gentleman stopped at last, and took off his hat and wiped his
face, and then looked down at me as if he were half-ashamed--

“I see you think I’m mad--” he began.

“Indeed, sir--” said I, stammering a little.

“Well, well! never mind,” he said; “the fact is, I live a good deal in
those old times. I’ve been up here, and sat and gone over the fight
so often, that when I get on the hill-side, I think I saw it all. In
the autumn evenings at twilight, when the southwest wind blows wild,
and the mist comes drifting over the broad downs, many a time, as I
have stolen down the silent hill-side, I have seen the weird old Pagan
king and the five earls, sitting one on each of the giants’ seats, and
looking mournfully out over the Vale, waiting--waiting--waiting for a
thousand years, all but fourteen. It’s a long time, sir, a long time;
but you and I may have to wait for a longer over the scene of some of
our doings. Who can say?”

I really now did begin to think the old gentleman a little crazy, so I
said nothing. Presently he went on in his old quiet voice:--

“There, now I have dismounted my hobby, and am sane again. I live in
a wild, lonely part of the world down west, and for the last thirty
years have read little else but the Bible, and books 200 years old
and upwards. Every man has his madness--that’s mine--I don’t get a
chance of letting it out once a-year. I have spent a very pleasant day
with you, Sir; and if you ever come down to these parts again, and
like to come on and see me, I shall be very glad. There is my name
and address;” and he gave me his card, but he didn’t say that I might
publish it.

“Thank you, Sir,” said I, putting it into my pocket-book; “but I hope
you will be up on the hill to-morrow?”

“Yes, I shall just ride up,” he said, “to see how they have used my old
friend; he wanted scouring sadly. The games I don’t much care about,
though I’m glad they go on. But not one man in a thousand who will be
on the hill to-morrow will know what the meaning of it all is; and that
makes it a melancholy sight to me, Sir, on the whole.”

“But what a pity,” said I, “that they are not told. It would interest
everybody else, I’m sure, just as it has me. Why don’t you tell it
then, Sir, in a book or a newspaper?”

“Nobody would read my old-world stuff,” said he. “No: a man must
understand and be in sympathy with his own generation to coax it into
caring about an older one. But now I must be going. If you have time to
walk down to that little clump of trees over there, towards Æthelred’s
camp, you will find an old Druidical cromlech well worth examining. It
is called Wayland Smith’s cave. Walter Scott, who should have known
better, says that the Danish king killed at Ashdown was buried there.
He was no more buried there than in Westminster Abbey. Good-bye.” And
so he put his cob into a canter, and went off along the Ridgeway.

When he was gone I walked down to the clump of trees and went into the
cave; and then sat down on the great flat stone which covers it over,
and finished putting down all I had heard from the old gentleman; and
thought what odd people a man finds about the world, and how many
things there are which one never heard of that other folk are spending
their lives over. Then I went up to the camp again to find Joe, for
the afternoon was getting on. True enough, as he had said, when I got
back there I found it all getting into order. All along the north
side were the theatres and peep-shows, and acrobats, and the pink-eyed
lady, and the other shows. On the west side were the publicans’ booths,
some of them all ready, and others half up, but all with their places
settled; and the great street of hucksters’ stalls and cheap-Jacks was
all set out along the south side, and as more and more of them came
up they went off to the end of the line and pitched regularly. The
gypsies and people with no regular business were all got away into a
corner, behind the stalls. On the west side the county police were
pitching their large tent close away by the bank, out of the way of
everybody; and, some way in front of them, Lord Craven’s people had
put up two military-looking tents which I heard had belonged to the
42d Regiment, with a great flagstaff close by them. About the middle
of the camp stood a large stage about six feet high, roped round for
the backswording and wrestling. There was plenty of room now, and all
the people, who were not working at the booths and stalls, were sitting
about boiling kettles and getting their food. It was a very cheerful,
pretty sight, up there out of the way of every thing.

I soon found Joe amongst a group of farmers and one or two young
gentlemen, some on horseback and some on foot, standing round the
Squire. They were talking over the arrangements before going home; and
I stood a little way off, so as not to interrupt them or to seem to be
pushing myself into their company.

“Now I think we have done all we can to-day,” said the Squire,
gathering up his reins; “but some of us must be up early to-morrow to
get the lists made, and settle every thing about the games.”

“About ten o’clock, Sir?”

“Yes, that will do capitally. Now I shall just go and see how they have
done the Horse.”

So he rode out of the camp, and we all followed over the brow of the
hill till we came to a good point for seeing the figure, which looked
as bright and clean as a new sixpence.

“I think he’ll do very well,” said the Squire.

“Listen to the scourers,” said one of the young gentlemen.

They had finished their work, and were sitting in a group round a
large can of beer which the Squire had sent down to them; and one of
them was singing a rumbling sort of ditty, with a tol-de-rol chorus, in
which the rest joined lazily.

One of these young gentlemen gave me what he said were the words they
were singing, afterwards, when I came to know him (as you will hear in
the next chapter); and it seems he had found out that I was collecting
all I could about the Horse. But I don’t quite know whether he wasn’t
cutting his jokes upon me, for he is “amazin’ found of fun,” as Joe
said; and for my part, I could never quite tell, when I was with him,
whether he was in jest or earnest. However, here are the words he gave
me:--

BALLAD OF THE SCOURING OF THE WHITE HORSE.

                       I.

    The owld White Harse wants zettin to rights
      And the Squire hev promised good cheer,
    Zo we’ll gee un a scrape to kip un in zhape,
      And a’ll last for many a year.

                      II.

    A was made a lang lang time ago
      Wi a good dale o’ labour and pains,
    By King Alferd the Great when he spwiled their consate
      And caddled,[21] thay wosbirds[22] the Danes.

                      III.

    The Bleawin Stwun in days gone by
      Wur King Alfred’s bugle harn,
    And the tharnin tree you med plainly zee
      As is called King Alferd’s tharn.

                      IV.

    There’ll be backsword play, and climmin the powl,
      And a race for a peg, and a cheese,
    And us thenks as hisn’s a dummell[23] zowl
      As dwont care for zich spwoorts as theze.

When we had done looking at the Horse, some went one way and some
another, and Joe and I down the hill to the Swan Inn, where we got the
trap and started away for Elm Close.

“Why, Dick, how did you manage to pick up the old gentleman who was
treating you at dinner?” said Joe; “I suppose he’s one of your London
folk.”

“’Twas he who picked me up,” said I, “for I never set eyes on him
before. But I can tell you he is a very learned party, and very kind
too. He told me all about the battle of Ashdown, and ever so many
more old stories. I should think he must have been two hours and more
telling them.”

“Sooner you than I,” said Joe. “Well, I thought I knew his face. He
must be the old gent as was poking about our parish last fall, and
sort of walking the bounds. Though there isn’t any call for that,
I’m sure, for we walk the bounds ourselves every year. The men as he
hired told me he was looking after some old stone, the play stone I
think he called it, and would have it he knew more about the names of
the fields, and why they were called so, than they as had lived there
all their lives. However, he stood ’em something handsome for their
trouble. I expect he isn’t quite right up here,” said he, touching his
forehead and looking at me.

“Just as right as you,” said I, “and I’ve no doubt he does know more
about your parish than all of you put together. I think he must be some
great antiquary.”

“Ah! that’s what the Squire said when I told him. A great angular Saxon
scholar he called him.”

“Anglo-Saxon, Joe,” said I, “not angular.”

“Well, Anglo or angular, it’s no odds,” said Joe; “I calls it
angular--that’s good English at any rate.”

“But, Joe,” said I, “I’ve taken down all he said, and should like to
read it to you. I’m sure it would interest you.”

“Well, after supper to-night, over a pipe, perhaps,” said Joe; “I ain’t
much of a hand at your old-world talk, you see. Or, I’ll tell you what,
you shall read it to Lu; she takes to book-learning and all that better
than I.”

“I shall be very glad indeed to read it to your sister,” said I; “and I
daresay she can tell me something more.”

“May be,” said Joe, drawing his whip gently over the mare’s loins; and
then he began telling me about the talk he had had with the Squire.

He seemed to have been telling him all about his quarrel at the vestry
with the other farmers, about keeping up the parish roads; and the
Squire had smoothed him down, and given him some good advice as to
how to get the roads made and the fences kept up without losing his
temper. Joe owned to me that he was often falling out with some of
his neighbours, or his hired men, when he couldn’t get things quite
his own way (for that’s what it came to, and Joe is a warm-tempered
fellow), and that he would sooner come six miles to get the Squire
to “tackle it,” than go to any other justice who lived nearer; “for
he knows our ways, and manages one way or another to get it out all
straight without making a Sessions job of it,” said Joe, as we drove
up to his gate; and though I was looking out to catch a sight of Miss
Lucy, and hoping she might be out in the garden, I couldn’t help
allowing to myself that perhaps the country mightn’t get on so much
better after all if the unpaid magistracy were done away with.

Joe went off to the stable to see after his precious chestnut, and
seemed to pity me because I didn’t go with him. But I was off round the
house and into the garden, to try and find Miss Lucy. When I did find
her though, I wasn’t quite pleased at first, as you may fancy when you
hear what she was doing.

There is a trellis-work about eight feet high, between the little
flower-garden and the kitchen-garden, and in it a wicket-gate, through
which runs a nice green walk by which you get from one to the other.
The trellis-work is so covered with roses, and jessamine, and other
creepers, that you can’t see through, at least not in summer time;
and I heard merry voices on the other side, but they couldn’t hear
me on the turf. So I hurried up to the wicket-gate; and the moment I
got through, there I saw Miss Lucy, and close by her side a young man
in a black coat, dark gray trousers, and a white tie. He had a great
ribstone-pippin apple in one hand, off the best tree in the orchard,
out of which he had taken a great bite or two, which I thought rather
vulgar; and there he was, holding up his bitten apple and some of the
creepers against the trellis-work, with both hands above Miss Lucy’s
head. And she stood there in her pretty white-straw hat, with the
ribbons dangling loose over her shoulders, tying up the creepers to the
trellis-work close to his face. I could see, too, that she was very
well dressed, for she had on a pretty embroidered collar, as white as
snow, with a nice bow of fresh pink ribbon in front; and the sleeves of
her gown were loose, and fell back a little as she reached up with the
string to tie the creepers, and showed her nice, white, round arms,
which looked very pretty, only I wished she had waited for me to hold
up the creepers instead of him. At her feet lay a basket full of apples
and pears, and lavender and mignonette; so they must have been going
about together for some time, picking fruit and flowers.

I stopped at the gate, and felt half inclined to go back; but he said
something to her, and then she turned round and called me, so I walked
up feeling rather sheepish. By the time I got up to them they had
finished tying up the creeper, and she introduced me to Mr. Warton, of
London. He held out his hand, and said he had often heard Joseph speak
of me, and was very glad to meet an old friend of his friend Hurst. So
we shook hands, and he began eating his apple again, and she picked up
her basket, and we walked together towards the house; but they were so
free and pleasant together, and laughed and joked so, that it made me
feel rather low, and I couldn’t talk easily, though I did manage to say
something about the White Horse, and how well it looked, and what a
wonderful place it was up on the hill, when they asked me about it.

I wasn’t sorry when she went in to look after the tea, and he sat down
to write a letter. So I went round to the farm-yard to look for Joe,
that I might find out from him about this Mr. Warton. I found Joe with
his fogger,[24] as he called him, looking at some calves, and thinking
of nothing but them and the pigs. However, I stuck to him and praised
all the beasts just as if I knew all about them, and so at last got him
out of the yard; and then I told him there was a Mr. Warton come.

“No! is he?” said he; “I’m so glad. I was afraid he couldn’t come down
as he didn’t answer my last letter.”

“Who is he, Joe?” said I.

“Haven’t I told you?” said he; “why, he’s a parson up somewhere in
London, and a real right sort. He was curate here for five years before
he went up to town.”

“He seems to know you and Miss Lucy very well,” said I.

“Bless you, yes!” said Joe; “Lu was in his school, and he prepared her
for confirmation. He’s the best company in the world, and not a bit
proud, like some parsons. When he was down here, he used to drop in of
an evening two or three times a week, and take his tea, or a bit of
supper, just like you might.”

“He’s a good bit older than we, though,” said I.

“Well, four or five years, maybe,” said Joe, looking rather surprised
at me; “I should say he was about thirty last grass, but I never asked
him; what does it matter?” and so we got to the front door, and I went
up-stairs to my room to wash my hands before tea. I made myself as
smart as I could, but I own I didn’t half like the way this Mr. Warton
went on. However, I thought Miss Lucy must see he was too old for her.

As I was dressing, I turned the matter over with myself, how I was
to behave down stairs. First, I thought I would try to ride the high
horse, and be silent and vexed, and make them all uncomfortable; but
then, thought I, will Miss Lucy see why I do it? It may be all out of
love for her, and jealousy of this Mr. Warton; and they say no young
woman dislikes to see men jealous about her. But suppose she shouldn’t
see it in that light? Mightn’t she only think, perhaps, that I was
a very changeable and disagreeable sort of fellow? That would never
do. Besides, after all, thought I, I’m down here at Joe’s house, and
I owe it to him to be as pleasant as I can. How’s he to know that I
am in love with his sister already? And this Mr. Warton, too; he’s a
clergyman, and seems a very good sort, as Joe said; and then he has
known them all so well, for so long; why am I to give myself airs
because he likes talking to Miss Lucy? So I settled it in my own mind
to go down with a smiling face, and to do all I could to make all the
rest happy; and I felt much better myself when I had made up my mind.

There never was such a tea and supper (for we had them both together
that night, as it was late) in the world; and I don’t think I could
have stood out five minutes if I had gone down in the sulks, as I
thought of doing at first. The old lady, and Joe, and Miss Lucy, were
all in great spirits at getting Mr. Warton down; and he was just like a
boy home for his holidays. He joked and rattled away about every thing;
except when they talked about any of his old parishioners or scholars,
and then he was as kind and tender as a woman, and remembered all
their names, and how many children there were in every family, and the
sort of mistakes the boys and girls used to make in school. And he
drew Miss Lucy out about the school, and Joe about the markets and the
labourers, and the old lady about the best way of pickling cabbages,
and me about London and my work, and shorthand, which he managed to
find out that I could write in no time. So we were all in the best
humour in the world, and pleased with one another and with him; and
spent half an hour in praising him after he had gone up stairs to
finish some writing which he had to do.

Then I asked them about the pastime, and what we should see next day on
the hill. Miss Lucy began directly about the stalls and the sights, and
the racing and the music; and cold dinner on the hill-side, and seeing
all her friends in their best dresses. Joe listened to her for a bit,
and then struck in--

“That’s all very well for you women,” said he; “but look here, Dick. If
what I hear comes true, we shall have a fine treat on the stage; for
they tells me there’s a lot of the best old gamesters in Somersetshire
coming up, to put in for the backsword prizes.”

“Then I’m sure I hope they won’t be allowed to play,” said Miss Lucy.

“Not let to play!” said Joe; “who put that into your head? Why, there’s
the printed list of the sports, and £12 prize for backswording, and £10
for wrestling.”

“Well, it’s a great shame, then,” said Miss Lucy; “for all the
respectable people for miles round will be on the hill, and I think the
gentlemen ought to stop them.”

“If they do, they’ll spoil the pastime; for there won’t be one man in
twenty up there who’ll care to see any thing else. Eh, old fellow?”
said Joe, turning to me.

“I agree with Miss Lucy,” said I; “for I’m sure if the women are
against these games, they can’t be good for the men, and ought to be
put down.”

“Dick, you’re a cockney, and know no better,” said Joe, giving me
a great spank on the back, which hurt a good deal and was very
disagreeable, only I didn’t say any thing because I knew he meant it
kindly; “but as for you, Lucy, you, a west-country yeoman’s daughter,
to talk like that! If you don’t take care, you shan’t go up the hill
to the pastime to-morrow at all; I’ll leave you at home with mother,”
and he shook his great fist at her.

“Won’t I go up though?” said she, laughing; “we’ll see, Master Joe;
why, I can walk up by myself, if it comes to that; besides, any of the
neighbours will give me a lift--or here’s Mr. Richard, or Mr. Warton.
I’m sure--”

“What’s that you’re saying, Miss Lucy? What am I to do, eh?” and the
parson walked in just as I was going to speak. I was vexed at his just
coming in, and taking the word out of my mouth.

“Why I was telling Joe that you’ll stop and take me up the hill, if he
leaves me behind; won’t you now, Mr. Warton?”

“Leave you behind, indeed! here’s a pretty to do!” said he, laughing.
“What in the world are you all talking about?”

“About the wrestling and backsword play,” struck in Joe; “now she
says--”

“Well, now, I’ll leave it to Mr. Warton,” said Miss Lucy, interrupting
him; “I know he won’t say it’s right for men to be fighting upon a high
stage before all the country side.”

“Stuff and nonsense with your fighting!” said Joe; “you know, Sir, very
well that they are old English games, and we sets great store by them
down here, though some of our folk as ought to know better does set
their faces against them now-a-days.”

“Yes, you know, Joe, that three or four clergymen have been preaching
against them only last Sunday,” said Miss Lucy.

“Then they ain’t the right sort, or they’d know better what to preach
against. I don’t take all for Gospel that the parsons say, mind you,”
said Joe.

Miss Lucy looked shocked, but Mr. Warton only laughed.

“Hullo, Joseph,” said he, “speaking evil of your spiritual pastors!
However, I won’t say you’re altogether wrong. Parsons are but men.”

“But, Sir,” said I, quite confidently, “I’m sure no clergyman can stand
up for fighting and quarrelling.”

“Of course not,” said he; “but what then?”

“Well, Sir, these sports, as they call them, are just fighting, and
nothing else, and lead to all sorts of quarrels and bad blood, and
so--”

“They don’t lead to nothing of the kind,” shouted Joe; “and you know
nothing about it, Dick.”

“Now, Joe, at our last feast,” said Miss Lucy, “didn’t Reuben Yates get
his head broken, and his arms all black and blue at backsword play?”

“Yes, and didn’t you and mother patch him up with yards of diachylum,
and give him his supper every night for a week, to come and be doctored
and lectured? Rube liked his suppers well enough, and didn’t mind the
plastering and lecturing much; but if he don’t go in to-morrow for the
young gamesters’ prize, my name ain’t Joe Hurst.”

“Then he’ll be a very ungrateful, wicked fellow,” said Miss Lucy.

“And you and mother won’t give him any more suppers or diachylum,” said
Joe; “but I dare say he won’t break his heart if you don’t give him
the preaching by itself. It does seem to me plaguy hard that the women
won’t let a man get his own head broke quietly, when he has a mind to
it.”

“And there was Simon Withers, too,” went on Miss Lucy, “he sprained his
ankle at the wrestling, and was in the house for three weeks, and his
poor old mother nearly starving.”

“’Twasn’t at wrestling, though,” said Joe, “’twas at hurdle-racing.
He’d much better have been at backsword; for a chap can go to work with
a broken head next morning, and feel all the better for it, but he
can’t with a sprained ankle.”

“What does Mr. Warton think?” said I; for somehow he was keeping back,
and seemed a little on Joe’s side, and if he showed that, I thought he
would lose ground with Miss Lucy.

“Oh! I’m sure Mr. Warton is on our side, ain’t you, Sir? Do tell Joe
how wrong it is of him to go on talking as he does.”

“No, no, Miss Lucy, I’m not going to be drawn into the quarrel as your
knight; you’re quite able to take your own part,” said Mr. Warton.

“I’m sure Mr. Warton is against us in his heart,” said I to Miss Lucy;
“only he’s a clergyman, and doesn’t like to say so.”

“Come, now, I can’t stand that,” said he to me; “and you and I must
have it out; only mind, Miss Lucy, you mustn’t come in; one at a time
is enough for me.”

“I won’t say a word, Sir, if Joe won’t.”

“Very well,” said he, “and now let’s get our ground clear. Do you
approve of the other sports, running matches, jumping matches, and all
the rest?”

“Yes, Sir, of course I do,” said I.

“And you see no harm in one man beating another in a race for a prize?”

“No, Sir, no harm at all.”

“Well, but I suppose one must have activity and endurance to win in any
of them?”

“Yes,” said I, “and good pluck, too, Sir. It takes as much heart, I’m
sure, any day, to win a hard race as a bout at backsword.”

“Very good,” said he. “Then putting every thing else aside, tell me
which you think the best man, he who doesn’t mind having his head
broken, or he who does?”

“Well, Sir,” said I, beginning to fence a bit, for I thought I saw what
he was driving at, “that depends on circumstances.”

“No, no,” said he, “I want a short answer. We’ve nothing to do with
circumstances. Suppose there were no circumstances in the world, and
only two men with heads to be broken?”

“Well, then, Sir,” said I, “I suppose the one who doesn’t mind having
his head broken, must be the best man.”

“Hah, hah!” laughed Joe, “that puts me in mind of old Ben Thomson last
feast. When he threw up his hat on the stage, he said he could get his
pint of beer any day for tuppence, but it wasn’t every day as he could
get his pint of beer and a broken head too for the same money.”

“Oh, but Mr. Warton--” broke in Miss Lucy.

“Now, you were not to say a word, you know,” said he.

“But Joe began, Sir.”

“Joseph, hold your tongue.”

“Very well, Sir,” said Joe, grinning.

“Then we come to this,” said he to me, “a man must have just the same
qualities to win at backsword as to win a race; and something else
besides, which is good in itself?”

“But, Sir,” said I, “that doesn’t meet the point. What I say is, that
backsword is a game in which men are sure to lose their tempers and
become brutal.”

“But don’t they sometimes lose their tempers in races?” said he.

“Yes, sometimes, perhaps,” said I, “but not often.”

“And sometimes they don’t lose them at backsword?” said he.

“Well, perhaps not, Sir.”

“Then it seems that all that can be said against backsword is, that
it is a harder trial of the temper than other games. Surely that’s no
reason for stopping it, but only for putting it under strict rules. The
harder the trial the better. I’m sure that’s good English sense.”

I didn’t quite know what to say, but Miss Lucy broke in again.

“Oh, but Mr. Warton, did you ever see any backsword play?”

“Now, Miss Lucy, that is against law,” said he; “but I don’t mind
answering. I never did, and I dare say your champion never has.”

“No, Sir,” said I; “but though you may have got the best of me, I don’t
believe you really mean that you think us wrong.”

“Would you, really, Sir, preach a sermon now in favour of backsword
play and wrestling?” asked Miss Lucy, with a long face.

“What’s that got to do with it, Lucy?” broke in Joe. “We’re not talking
about preaching sermons, but about what’s right for country chaps to
do at pastimes.”

“Now, Joseph, I’m not going to ride off on any hobby of yours--besides,
your sister’s test is right. Several of your clergy about here have
preached against these games, as was their duty if they had considered
the subject well, and thought them wrong. I have never thought much
about the matter till to-night. At present I think your clergy wrong.
If I hold to that belief I would preach it; for I hope I never
seriously say any thing in the parlour which I wouldn’t say in the
pulpit.”

Just then, the tall clock in the passage outside gave a sort of cluck,
which meant half-past nine o’clock, and Joe jumped up and opened the
door for the servants, and gave Mr. Warton the prayer-book. And then as
soon as ever prayers were over, he bustled his mother and sister off
to bed, though I could see that Miss Lucy wasn’t half satisfied in her
mind about the backsword play and wrestling, and wanted to stay and
hear something more from Mr. Warton. But Joe is always in a hurry for
his pipe when half-past nine strikes, so we all had to humour him, and
Mr. Warton and I went with him into the kitchen to smoke our pipes.

[21] “Caddle”--to worry: from cād, strife.--The Berkshire scholiast
suggests that the modern “cad,” having regard to the peculiarities of
the class, must be the same word.

[22] “Wosbird,” bird of woe, of evil omen.

[23] “Dummell,” dull, stupid.

[24] “Fogger”--quasi fodderer--he who giveth fodder to the
cattle--generally used for the farmer’s head man.




CHAPTER V.


Now when we had fairly lighted up, and Joe had mixed us a glass of
gin and water a piece, I felt that it was a very good time for me to
have a talk about the White Horse and the scourings. I wasn’t quite
satisfied in my mind with all that the old gentleman had told me on the
hill; and, as I felt sure that Mr. Warton was a scholar, and would find
out directly if there was any thing wrong in what I had taken down, I
took out my note-book, and reminded Joe that he had promised to listen
to it over his pipe. Joe didn’t half like it, and wanted to put the
reading off, but Mr. Warton was very good-natured about it, and said he
should like to hear it--so it was agreed that I should go on, and so I
began. Joe soon was dozing, and every now and then woke up with a jerk,
and pretended he had been listening, and made some remark in broad
Berkshire. He always talks much broader when he is excited, or half
asleep, than when he is cool and has all his wits about him. But I kept
on steadily till I had got through it all, and then Mr. Warton said he
had been very much interested, and believed that all I had taken down
was quite correct.

“What put it into your head,” said he, “to take so much interest in the
Horse?”

“I don’t know, Sir,” said I, “but somehow I can’t think of any thing
else now I have been up there and heard about the battle.” This wasn’t
quite true, for I thought more of Miss Lucy, but I couldn’t tell him
that.

“When I was curate down here,” said he, “I was bitten with the same
maggot. Nothing would serve me but to find out all I could about the
Horse. Now, Joe here, who’s fast asleep--”

“No, he bean’t,” said Joe starting, and giving a pull at his pipe,
which had gone out.

“Well, then, Joe here, who is wide awake, and the rest, who were born
within sight of him, and whose fathers fought at Ashdown, and have
helped to scour him ever since, don’t care half so much for him as we
strangers do.”

“Oh! I dwon’t allow that, mind you,” said Joe; “I dwon’t know as I
cares about your long-tailed words and that; but for keeping the Horse
in trim, and as should be, why, I be ready to pay--”

“Never mind how much, Joseph.”

Joe grinned, and put his pipe in his mouth again. I think he liked
being interrupted by the Parson.

“As I was saying, I found out all I could about the Horse, though it
was little enough, and I shall be very glad to tell you all I know.”

“Then, Sir,” said I, “may I ask you any questions I have a mind to ask
you about it?”

“Certainly,” said he; “but you mustn’t expect to get much out of me.”

“Thank you, Sir,” said I. “A thousand years seems a long time, Sir,
doesn’t it? Now, how do we know that the Horse has been there all that
time?”

“At any rate,” said he, “we know that the Hill has been called, ‘White
Horse Hill,’ and the Vale, the ‘Vale of White Horse,’ ever since the
time of Henry the First; for there are cartularies of the Abbey of
Abingdon in the British Museum which prove it. So, I think, we may
assume that they were called after the figure, and that the figure was
there before that time.”

“I’m very glad to hear that, Sir,” said I. “And then about the
scourings and the pastime? They must have been going on ever since the
Horse was cut out?”

“Yes, I think so,” said he. “You have got quotations there from Wise’s
letter, written in 1736. He says that the scouring was an old custom in
his time. Well, take his authority for the fact up to that time, and
I think I can put you in the way of finding out something, though not
much, about most of the Scourings which have been held since.”

And he was as good as his word; for he took me about after the pastime
to some old men in the neighbouring parishes, from whom I found out a
good deal that I have put down in this chapter. And the Squire, too,
when Joe told him what I was about, helped me.

Now I can’t say that I have found out all the Scourings which have been
held since 1736, but I did my best to make a correct list, and this
seems to be the proper place to set it all down.

Well, the first Scouring, which I could find out any thing about, was
held in 1755, and all the sports then seem to have been pretty much
the same as those of the present day. But there was one thing which
happened which could not very well have happened now. A fine dashing
fellow, dressed like a gentleman, got on to the stage, held his own
against all the old gamesters, and in the end won the chief prize for
backsword-play, or cudgel-play, as they used to call it.

While the play was going on there was plenty of talk as to who this man
could be, and some people thought they knew his face. As soon as he had
got the prize he jumped on his horse, and rode off. Presently, first
one, and then another, said it was Tim Gibbons, of Lambourn, who had
not been seen for some years, though strange stories had been afloat
about him.

It was the Squire who told me the story about Tim Gibbons; but he took
me to see an old man who was a descendant of Tim’s, and so I think I
had better give his own account of his ancestor and his doings. We
found the old gentleman, a hale, sturdy old fellow, working away in a
field at Woolstone, and, as near as I could get it, this was what he
had to say about the Scouring of 1755:--

_Squire._ “Good morning, Thomas. How about the weather? Did the White
Horse smoke his pipe this morning?”

_Thos._ “Mornin’, Sir. I didn’t zee as ’a did. I allus notices he doos
it when the wind blaws moor to th’ east’ard. I d’wont bode no rain to
day, Sir.”

_Squire._ “How old are you, Thomas?”

_Thos._ “Seventy year old this Christmas, Sir. I wur barn at Woolstone,
in the hard winter, when I’ve heard tell as volks had to bwile their
kettles wi’ the snaw.”

_Squire._ “I want to know something about your family, Thomas.”

_Thos._ “Well, Sir, I bean’t no ways ashamed of my family, I can
assure ’ee. I’ve a got two zons, and vour daaters. One on ’em, that’s
my oldest bwoy, Sir, wur all droo’ the Crimee wars, and never got a
scratch. In the Granadier Guards, Sir, he be. A uncommon sprack[25]
chap, Sir, though I says it, and as bowld as a lion; only while he wur
about our village wi’ t’other young chaps, he must allus be a fighting.
But not a bad-tempered chap, Sir, I assure ’ee. Then, Sir--”

_Squire._ “But, Thomas, I want to know about those that came before
you. What relation was Timothy Gibbons, whom I’ve heard folks talk
about, to you?”

_Thos._ “I suppose as you means my great-grandvather, Sir.”

_Squire._ “Perhaps so, Thomas. Where did he live, and what trade did he
follow?”

_Thos._ “I’ll tell ’ee, Sir, all as I knows; but somehow, vather and
mother didn’t seem to like to talk to we bwoys about ’un.”

_Squire._ “Thank ’ee, Thomas. Mind, if he went wrong it’s all the more
credit to you, who have gone straight; for there isn’t a more honest
man in the next five parishes.”

_Thos._ “I knows your meanings good, and thank ’ee kindly, Sir, tho’
I be no schollard. Well, Timothy Gibbons, my great grandvather, you
see, Sir, foller’d blacksmithing at Lambourn, till he took to highway
robbin’, but I can’t give ’ee no account o’ when or wher.’ Arter
he’d been out, may be dree or vour year, he and two companions cum
to Baydon; and whilst hiding theirselves and baiting their hosses in
a barn, the constables got ropes round the barn-yard and lined ’em
in. Then all dree drawed cuts[26] who was to go out fust and face
the constables. It fell to Tim’s two companions to go fust, but their
hearts failed ’em, and they wouldn’t go. So Tim cried out as ‘he’d
shew ’em what a Englishman could do,’ and mounted his hos and drawed
his cutlash, and cut their lines a-two, and galloped off clean away;
but I understood as t’other two was took. Arter that, may be a year
or two, he cum down to a pastime on White Hos Hill, and won the prize
at backswording; and when he took his money, fearing lest he should
be knowed, he jumped on his hos under the stage, and galloped right
off, and I don’t know as he ever cum again to these parts. Then I’ve
understood as things throve wi’ ’un, as ’um will at times, Sir, wi’
thay sort o’ chaps, and he and his companions built the Inn called ‘the
Magpies,’ on Hounslow Heath; but I dwon’t know as ever he kep’ the
house hisself, except it med ha’ been for a short while. Howsomever, at
last he was took drinking at a public-house, someweres up Hounslow way,
wi’ a companion who played a cross wi’ ’un, and I b’live ’a was hanged
at Newgate. But I never understood as he killed any body, Sir, and a’d
used to gie some o’ the money as he took to the poor, if he knowed they
was in want.”

_Squire._ “Thank’ee, Thomas. What a pity he didn’t go soldiering; he
might have made a fine fellow then!”

_Thos._ “Well, Sir, so t’wur, I thinks. Our fam’ly be given to that
sort o’ thing. I wur a good hand at elbow and collar wrastling myself,
afore I got married; but then I gied up all that, and ha’ stuck to work
ever sence.”

_Squire._ “Well, Thomas, you’ve given me the story I wanted to hear, so
it’s fair I should give you a Sunday dinner.”

_Thos._ “Lord love ’ee, Sir, I never meant nothin’ o’ that sort; our
fam’ly”--

We were half-way across the field, when I looked round, and saw old
Thomas still looking after us and holding the Squire’s silver in his
hand, evidently not comfortable in his mind at having failed in telling
us all he had to say about _his fam’ly_, of which he seemed as proud as
any duke can be of his, and I dare say has more reason for his pride
than many of them. At last, however, as we got over the stile, he
pocketed the affront and went on with his work.

I could find out nothing whatever about the next Scouring; but I was
lucky enough to get the printed hand-bill which was published before
the one in 1776, which I made out to be the next but one after that at
which Tim Gibbons played.

When I showed this old hand-bill to the Parson he was very much
tickled. He took up the one which the Committee put out this last time,
and looked at them together for a minute, and then tossed them across
to me.

“What a queer contrast,” said he, “between those two bills.”

“How do you mean, Sir?” said I; “why the games seem to be nearly the
same.”

“So they are,” said he; “but look at the prizes. Our great
grandfathers, you’ll see, gave no money prizes; we scarcely any others.
The gold-laced hat and buckskin breeches have gone, and current coin
of the realm reigns supreme. Then look at the happy-go-lucky way in
which the old bill is put out. No date given, no name signed! who was
responsible for the breeches, or the shoe-buckles? And then, what
grammar! The modern bill, you see, is in the shape of resolutions,
passed at a meeting, the chairman’s name being appended as security
for the prizes.”

“That seems much better and more business-like,” said I.

“Then you see the horserace for a silver cup has disappeared,” he
went on. “Epsom and Ascot have swallowed up the little country races,
just as big manufacturers swallow up little ones, and big shops whole
streets of little shops, and nothing but monsters flourish in this age
of unlimited competition and general enlightenment. Not that I regret
the small country town-races, though.”

“And I see, Sir, that ‘smocks to be run for by ladies,’ is left out in
the modern bill.”

“A move in the right direction there, at any rate,” said he; “the bills
ought to be published side by side.” So I took his advice, and here
they are:--

                  “WHITE HORSE HILL, BERKS, 1776.[27]

    “The scowering and cleansing of the White Horse is fixed for
    Monday the 27th day of May; on which day a Silver Cup will be
    run for near White Horse Hill, by any horse, &c. that never run
    for any thing, carrying 11 stone, the best of 3 two-mile heats,
    to start at ten o’clock.

    “Between the heats will be run for by Poneys, a Saddle, Bridle,
    and Whip; the best of three two-mile heats, the winner of 2
    heats will be entitled to the Saddle, the second best the
    Bridle, and the third the Whip.

    “The same time a Thill harness will be run for by Cart-horses,
    &c. in their harness and bells, the carters to ride in smock
    frocks without saddles, crossing and jostling, but no whipping
    allowed.

    “A flitch of Bacon to be run for by asses.

    “A good Hat to be run for by men in sacks, every man to bring
    his own sack.

    “A Waistcoat, 10_s._ 6_d._ value, to be given to the person who
    shall take a bullet out of a tub of flour with his mouth in the
    shortest time.

    “A Cheese to be run for down the White Horse Manger.

    “Smocks to be run for by ladies, the second best of each prize
    to be entitled to a Silk Hat.

    “_Cudgel-playing_ for a _gold-laced Hat_ and a pair of buckskin
    Breeches, and _Wrestling_ for a pair of silver Buckles and a
    pair of pumps.

    “The horses to be on the White Horse Hill by nine o’clock.

    “No less than four horses, &c. or asses, to start for any of
    the above prizes.”

                               PASTIME.

    _To be held on the occasion of the Scouring of the White Horse,
    September 17th and 18th, 1857._

    At a meeting held at the Craven Arms, Uffington, on the 20th
    day of August, 1857, the following resolutions (amongst others)
    were passed unanimously:--

    First. That a pastime be held on the White Horse Hill, on
    Thursday and Friday, the 17th and 18th of September, in
    accordance with the old custom at the time of “The Scouring of
    the Horse.”

    2dly. That E. Martin Atkins, Esq. of Kingston Lisle, be
    appointed Treasurer.

    3dly. That prizes be awarded for the following games and
    sports, That is to say--

        Backsword Play. { Old gamesters,   £8.
                        { Young gamesters, £4.

        Wrestling.      { Old gamesters,   £5.
                        { Young gamesters, £4.

    A jingling match.

    Foot races.

    Hurdle races.

    Race of cart-horses in Thill harness (for a new set of harness).

    Donkey race (for a flitch of bacon).

    Climbing pole (for a leg of mutton).

    Races down “the Manger,” (for cheeses.)

    A pig will be turned out on the down, to be the prize of the
    man who catches him (under certain regulations); and further
    prizes will be awarded for other games and sports as the funds
    will allow.

    4thly. That no person be allowed to put up or use a stall or
    booth on the ground, without the previous sanction of Mr.
    Spackman, of Bridgecombe Farm, [the occupier,] who is hereby
    authorized to make terms with any person wishing to put up a
    stall or booth.

                                                Signed,
                                      E. MARTIN ATKINS, _Chairman_.

Then came a Scouring on Whit-Monday, May 15, 1780, and of the doings on
that occasion, there is the following notice in the “Reading Mercury”
of May 22, 1780:--

“The ceremony of scowering and cleansing that noble monument of Saxon
antiquity, the White Horse, was celebrated on Whit-Monday, with great
joyous festivity. Besides the customary diversions of horseracing,
foot-races, &c. many uncommon rural diversions and feats of activity
were exhibited to a greater number of spectators than ever assembled
on any former occasion. Upwards of thirty thousand persons were
present, and amongst them most of the nobility and gentry of this and
the neighbouring counties; and the whole was concluded without any
material accident. The origin of this remarkable piece of antiquity
is variously related; but most authors describe it as a monument to
perpetuate some signal victory, gained near the spot, by some of our
most ancient Saxon princes. The space occupied by this figure is more
than an acre of ground.”

I also managed to get a list of the games, which is just the same as
the one of 1776, except that in addition there was “a jingling-match
by eleven blindfolded men, and one unmasked and hung with bells, for a
pair of buckskin breeches.”

The Parson found an old man, William Townsend by name, a carpenter at
Woolstone, whose father, one Warman Townsend, had run down the manger
after the fore-wheel of a wagon, and won the cheese at this Scouring.
He told us the story as his father had told it to him, how that “eleven
on ’em started, and amongst ’em a sweep chimley and a millurd; and the
millurd tripped up the sweep chimley and made the zoot flee a good
’un;” and how “the wheel ran pretty nigh down to the springs that
time,” which last statement the Parson seemed to think couldn’t be
true. But old Townsend knew nothing about the other sports.

Then the next Scouring was held in 1785, and the Parson found several
old men who could remember it when they were very little. The one who
was most communicative was old William Ayres of Uffington, a very dry
old gentleman, about eighty-four years old:--

“When I wur a bwoy about ten years old,” said he, “I remembers I went
up White Hoss Hill wi’ my vather to a pastime. Vather’d brewed a barrel
o’ beer to sell on the Hill--a deal better times then than now, Sir!”

“Why, William?” said the Parson.

“Augh! bless’ee, Sir, a man medn’t brew and sell his own beer now;
and oftentimes he can’t get nothin’ fit to drink at thaay little
beer-houses as is licensed, nor at some o’ the public-houses too for
that matter. But ’twur not only for that as the times wur better then,
you see, Sir----”

“But about the sports, William?”

“Ees Sir, I wur gandering sure enough,” said the old man; “well now,
there wur Varmer Mifflin’s mare run for and won a new cart saddle and
thill-tugs--the mare’s name wur _Duke_. As many as a dozen or moor
horses run, and they started from Idle’s Bush, which wur a vine owld
tharnin’-tree in thay days--a very nice bush. They started from Idle’s
Bush, as I tell ’ee, Sir, and raced up to the Rudge-waay; and Varmer
Mifflin’s mare had it all one way, and beat all the t’other on ’um
holler. The pastime then wur a good ’un--a wunderful sight o’ volk of
all sorts, rich and poor. John Morse of Uffington, a queerish sort of a
man, grinned agin another chap droo’ hos collars, but John got beaat--a
fine bit of spwoort to be shure, Sir, and made the folks laaf. Another
geaam wur to bowl a cheese down the Mainger, and the first as could
catch ’un had ’un. The cheese was a tough ’un and held together.”

“Nonsense, William, that’s impossible,” broke in the Parson.

“Augh Sir, but a did though, I assure ’ee,” persisted William Ayres,
“but thaay as tasted ’un said a warn’t very capital arter all.”

“I daresay,” said the Parson, “for he couldn’t have been made of any
thing less tough than ash pole.”

“Hah, hah, hah,” chuckled the old man, and went on.

“There wur running for a peg too, and they as could ketch ’un and hang
’un up by the tayl, had ’un. The girls, too, run races for smocks--a
deal of pastime, to be sure, Sir. There wur climmin’ a grasy pole for
a leg of mutton, too; and backsoordin’, and wrastlin’, and all that,
ye knows, Sir. A man by the name of Blackford, from the low countries,
Zummersetshire, or that waay some weres, he won the prize, and wur
counted the best hand for years arter, and no man couldn’t break
his yead; but at last, nigh about twenty years arter, I’ll warn[28]
’twur--at Shrin’um Revel, Harry Stanley, the landlord of the Blawin’
Stwun, broke his yead, and the low-country men seemed afeard o’ Harry
round about here for long arter that. Varmer Small-bwones of Sparsholt,
a mazin’ stout man, and one as scarce no wun go where ’a would could
drow down, beaat all the low-country chaps at wrastlin’, and none
could stan’ agean ’un. And so he got the neam o’ Varmer Greaat Bwones.
’Twur only when he got a drap o’ beer a leetle too zoon, as he wur
ever drowed at wrastlin’, but they never drowed ’un twice, and he had
the best men come agean ’un for miles. This wur the first pastime as I
well remembers, but there med ha’ been some afore, for all as I knows.
I ha’ got a good memorandum, Sir, and minds things well when I wur a
bwoy, that I does. I ha’ helped to dress the White Hoss myself, and a
deal o’ work ’tis to do’t as should be, I can asshure ’ee, Sir. About
Claay Hill, ’twixt Fairford and Ziziter, I’ve many a time looked back
at ’un, and ’a looks as nat’ral as a pictur, Sir.”

Between 1785 and 1803 there must have been at least two Scourings, but
somehow none of the old men could remember the exact years, and they
seemed to confuse them with those that came later on, and though I
looked for them in old county papers, I could not find any notice of
them.

At the Scouring of 1803, Beckingham of Baydon won the prize at
wrestling; Flowers and Ellis from Somersetshire won the prize at
backsword play; the waiter at the Bell Inn, Farringdon, won the cheese
race, and at jumping in sacks; and Thomas Street, of Niton, won the
prize for grinning through horse collars, “but,” as my informant told
me, “a man from Woodlands would ha’ beaat, only he’d got no teeth. This
geaam made the congregation laaf ’mazinly.”

Then came a Scouring in 1808, at which the Hanney men came down in a
strong body and made sure of winning the prize for wrestling. But all
the other gamesters leagued against them, and at last their champion,
Belcher, was thrown by Fowler of Baydon;--both these men are still
living. Two men, “with very shiny top-boots, quite gentlemen, from
London,” won the prize for backsword play, one of which gentlemen
was Shaw, the life-guardsman, a Wiltshire man himself as I was told,
who afterwards died at Waterloo after killing so many cuirassiers. A
new prize was given at this pastime and a very blackguard one, viz:
a gallon of gin or half a guinea for the woman who would smoke most
tobacco in an hour. Only two gypsy women entered, and it seems to have
been a very abominable business, but it is the only instance of the
sort that I could hear of at any Scouring.

The old men disagree as to the date of the next Scouring, which was
either in 1812 or 1813; but I think in the latter year, because the
clerk of Kingstone Lisle, an old Peninsula man, says that he was at
home on leave in this year, and that there was to be a Scouring. And
all the people were talking about it when he had to go back to the
wars. At this Scouring there was a prize of a loaf made out of a bushel
of flour, for running up the manger, which was won by Philip New,
of Kingstone-in-the-Hole; who cut the great loaf into pieces at the
top, and sold the pieces for a penny a piece. I am sure he must have
deserved a great many pennies for running up that place, if he really
ever did it; for I would just as soon undertake to run up the front
of the houses in Holborn. The low country men won the first backsword
prize, and one Ford, of Ashbury, the second; and the Baydon men, headed
by Beckingham, Fowler, and Breakspear, won the prize for wrestling. One
Henry Giles (of Hanney, I think they said) had wrestled for the prize,
and I suppose took too much beer afterwards; at any rate, he fell into
the canal on his way home and was drowned. So the jury found, “Killed
at wrastlin’;” “though,” as my informant said, “’twur a strange thing
for a old geamster as knew all about the stage, to be gettin’ into the
water for a bout. Hows’mever, Sir, I hears as they found it as I tells
’ee, and you med see it any day as you’ve a mind to look in the parish
register.”

Then I couldn’t find that there had been another Scouring till 1825,
but the one which took place in that year seems by all accounts to
have been the largest gathering that there has ever been. The games
were held at the Seven Barrows, which are distant two miles in a
southeasterly direction from the White Horse, instead of in Uffington
Castle; but I could not make out why. These seven barrows, I heard the
Squire say, are probably the burial-places of the principal men who
were killed at Ashdown, and near them are other long irregular mounds,
all full of bones huddled together anyhow, which are very likely the
graves of the rank and file.

After this there was no Scouring till 1838, when, on the 19th and 20th
of September, the old custom was revived, under the patronage of Lord
Craven. The _Reading Mercury_ congratulates its readers on the fact,
and adds that no more auspicious year could have been chosen for the
revival, “than that in which our youthful and beloved Queen first wore
the British crown, and in which an heir was born to the ancient and
noble house of Craven, whom God preserve.” I asked the Parson if he
knew why it was that such a long time had been let to pass between the
1825 Scouring and the next one.

“You see it was a transition time,” said he; “old things were passing
away. What with Catholic Emancipation, and Reform, and the new Poor
Law, even the quiet folk in the Vale had no time or heart to think
about pastimes; and machine-breaking and rick-burning took the place of
wrestling and backsword play.”

“But then, Sir,” said I, “this last fourteen years we haven’t had any
Reform Bill (worse luck) and yet there was no Scouring between 1843 and
1857.”

“Why can’t you be satisfied with my reason?” said he; “now you must
find one out for yourself.”

The last Scouring, in September, 1843, Joe had been at himself, and
told me a long story about, which I should be very glad to repeat,
only I think it would rather interfere with my own story of what I
saw myself. The Berkshire and Wiltshire men, under Joe Giles of
Shrivenham, got the better of the Somersetshire men, led by Simon
Stone, at backsword play; and there were two men who came down from
London, who won the wrestling prize away from the countrymen. “What
I remember best, however,” said Joe, “was all the to-do to get the
elephant’s caravan up the hill, for Wombwell’s menagerie came down
on purpose for the Scouring. I should think they put-to a matter of
four-and-twenty horses, and then stuck fast four or five times. I was a
little chap then but I sat and laughed at ’em a good one; and I don’t
know that I’ve seen so foolish a job since.”

“I don’t see why, Joe,” said I.

“You don’t?” said he, “well, that’s good, too. Why didn’t they turn the
elephant out and make him pull his own caravan up? He would have been
glad to do it, poor old chap, to get a breath of fresh air, and a look
across the vale.”

       *       *       *       *       *

But now that I have finished all that I have to tell about the old
Scourings, (at least all that I expect any body will read,) I must go
back again to the kitchen on the night of the 16th of September, 1857.
Joe, who, as I said, was half asleep while I was reading, soon waked
up afterwards, though it was past eleven o’clock, and began to settle
how we were to go up the hill the next morning.

“Now I shall ride the chestnut up early,” said he, “’cause I may be
wanted to help the Squire and the rest, but it don’t matter for the
rest of you. I’ll have a saddle put on my old brown horse, and he’ll be
quiet enough, for he has been at harvest work, and the four-wheel must
come up with Lu somehow. Will you ride or drive, Sir?” said he, turning
to the Parson.

“Oh, I don’t mind; whichever is most convenient,” said Mr. Warton.

“Did’st ever drive in thy life, Dick?” said Joe to me.

I was very near saying “yes,” for I felt ashamed of not being able to
do what they could; however, I told the truth, and said “no;” and next
minute I was very glad I had, for, besides the shame of telling a lie,
how much worse it would have been to be found out by Miss Lucy in the
morning, or to have had an upset or some accident.

So it was settled that Mr. Warton should drive the four-wheel, and that
I should ride the old horse. I didn’t think it necessary to say that I
had never ridden any thing but the donkeys on Hampstead Heath, and the
elephant in the Zoological Gardens. And so, when all was settled, we
went to bed.

[25] “Sprack,”--sprightly.

[26] “Draw cuts,”--to draw lots.

[27] This hand-bill was kindly given me by H. Godwin, Esq., of Newbury.

[28] “Warn,”--contraction of the word “warrant.”




CHAPTER VI.


Next morning I got up early, for I wasn’t quite easy in my mind about
riding Joe’s old horse, and so I thought I would just go round and
look at him, and ask the fogger something about his ways. It was a
splendid morning, not a cloud to be seen. I found the fogger strapping
away at the horses. Everybody had been up and about since daylight, to
get their day’s work done, so that they might get away early to the
pastime. All the cows had been milked and turned out again, and Joe was
away in the fields, looking after his men.

I stood beating about the bush for some time, for I didn’t want to let
the man see what I was thinking of if I could help it. However, when he
brought out the old brown horse to clean him down, I went up and patted
him, and asked whether he was a good saddle horse.

[Illustration]

“Ees, there warn’t much fault to find wi’ un,” said the fogger,
stopping his hissing and rubbing for a moment, “leastways for them as
didn’t mind a high goer.”

I didn’t quite know what he meant by a high goer, so I asked him if the
brown was up to my weight.

“Lor’ bless ’ee, ees. He’d make no account o’ vivteen stun. Be you to
ride un up the hill, Sir, make so bold?” said he.

“Yes, at least I think so,” said I.

“Hev ’ee got arra loose tooth, Sir?” said he, grinning.

“No,” said I, “why?”

“’Cause he’ll be as likely as not to shake un out for ’ee, Sir, if you
lets un hev his head up on the downs.”

I didn’t like this account of the brown horse, for as I hadn’t ridden
much, he might take his head perhaps whether I let him have it or not.
So I made up my mind not to ride. I thought I would go behind in the
four-wheel, for I didn’t like to leave Miss Lucy all alone with the
Parson for so long; but then I found out that one of the carter-boys
was to go behind to look after the horses, and I didn’t choose to be
put up side by side with him, to look ridiculous. There was a big
wagon going up, too, full of the farm servants, but that didn’t seem to
suit me any better, so I settled with myself that I would just start
and walk up.

Joe, luckily for me, thought he had settled every thing, and so at
breakfast said nothing more about the old horse; though I was afraid
he would every minute, and then I should have had to pretend I was
going to ride, or they might have found out that I didn’t quite like
the notion. I was very glad when I saw him fairly off after breakfast,
cantering away on the chestnut; and, very soon afterwards, I took a
good stout stick of Joe’s in my hand, put my note-book in my pocket,
and started off quietly by myself.

At first as I walked along I didn’t enjoy myself much for thinking of
the four-wheel, and I was almost getting jealous of the Parson again.
But I soon got over it, when I remembered how kind he had been the
night before. And I felt, too, that if he really was making up to her
there was very little chance for me, so I had better make up my mind
anyhow to see and enjoy every thing I could. I don’t think I was very
much in love at the time; if it had been a week later I should have
found it much harder perhaps.

I kept along the shady side of the road, for it was getting hot
already, and crossed the canal, and kept making up towards the hills.
I wasn’t sure of the way, but I knew that if once I got up the hill I
should find the Ridgeway, and could follow it all the way up to the
Castle. After a bit I fell in with groups of people, all going the same
way; and so, following on with them, after about an hour’s walk, I came
to the foot of the hills; and found a pretty little inn, standing back
from the road, nestled into a plantation, where everybody else seemed
to be stopping; and so I stopped too, and sat down on the bench before
the door to have a glass of beer before facing the pull up to the top.

In front of the door was an oak tree, and under the tree a big stone
with some curious holes in it, into which pieces of wood were fitted,
secured by a padlock and chain. I was wondering what it could be, when
the landlord came out with some of his guests, and pulling out a key
unlocked the padlock, and took the pieces of wood out of the holes.
Then there was some talk between the young men and their sweethearts,
and first one and then another stooped down and blew into the hole at
the top, and the stone made a dull moaning sound, unlike any thing I
had ever heard. The landlord told me that when it was well blown on a
still day, it could be heard for four or five miles, and I should think
it could; for I left them blowing away when I started again, and heard
the sound every now and then until I was close up to the Castle, though
the wind blew from the south, and down the hill.

I should think a dozen parties, in all sorts of odd go-carts and other
vehicles, or on foot, must have passed the Blowing-Stone in the ten
minutes which I spent on the bench. So I got quite eager to be up at
the Castle, and paid for my beer and started again. It is a very long
stiff pull up Blowing-Stone Hill, and the road is not a very good
one; so I soon began to pass the gigs and carts, most of which had
to stop every hundred yards or so, to let the horses and donkeys get
their wind. Half-way up, in the worst part of the hill, I found an old
huckstering woman and a boy in great trouble. They had a little cart
laden with poles and boards for a stall, and two great sacks of nuts
and sweet-stuff; and only one donkey in the shafts, who had got one
wheel of the cart into a deep chalk rut, and stood there like a post.
The woman and boy were quite beat with dragging at his head, and trying
to lift the wheel out of the rut, and as I came up she was “fairly
giving out.”

“Lawk-a-massy! how ever be I to scawt[29] up? Do’ee lend a help,
there’s a good soul,” said she to me.

Well, I couldn’t go by and leave her there, though I didn’t half like
having to stop; so I helped to lift the wheel out, and then we pushed
the cart up a few yards, and the old donkey tried to sidle it into
another rut, and we had another fight with him. My blood got up at his
obstinacy; I don’t believe there ever was another such a donkey in the
world; so the more he backed and sidled, the more I and the old woman
and the boy fought. And then the people that passed us began to laugh
and joke at us, and I got very angry at them, and the old woman, and
everybody; but I set my teeth, and made up my mind to get him up to the
top if I stayed there all day.

I should think we must have been nearly half an hour at work, and had
got on about three hundred yards or so, when a fine dog-cart on high
wheels came up. I heard the gentlemen in it talking and laughing as
they came near us; but I didn’t look up, and kept working away at the
donkey, for I was afraid they would only joke at us.

“Oh deary me, deary me, Master Gaarge, be that you?” I heard the old
woman call out; “now do’ee stop some o’ the chaps, and tell ’em to
help. I be nigh caddled to death wi’ this drattled old jackass--oh
dear, oh dear!”

“Why, Betty! what in the world are you after?” said a merry voice,
which I thought I had heard before; and, looking up, I saw the young
gentleman who had promised me the song.

“Oh, you see, Master Gaarge, I thought as I might turn a honest penny
if I could only win up to the pastime wi’ some nuts and brandy-balls.
So I loaned neighbour Tharne’s cart as he fetches coals from the canal
wi’, and his ass--and if ’twas Balaam’s ass hisself he couldn’t be no
wus--and here I be; and if it hadn’t a been for this kind gentleman”--

“Well, stop your talk, Betty, and take hold of his head,” said he,
jumping out of his dog-cart and giving the reins to the one who was
beside him. “Ah, good morning,” nodding to me, as he came to the back
of the cart, “now then, with a will! shove away!”

So we shoved the cart hard against the donkey’s legs. “Don’t pull,
Betty, let him have his head; just keep hold of the reins. Look out,
boy; stop him making for the ditch;” and away went Master Neddy
scrambling up hill, for he found that the cart was coming over his back
if he didn’t move on. Master George was as strong as a ballast heaver,
and the donkey seemed to find it out quick enough, for we were up the
hill in no time.

“Bless your kind heart, Master Gaarge!” almost sobbed the old woman; “I
be all straight now. Do’ee hev summat to suck now, or some nuts, and
this kind gentleman too; you allus wur fond o’ suck;” and she began
untying the neck of one of her sacks.

“Oh, Betty, you wicked old lone woman!” said he, “haven’t you made me
ill often enough with your nastinesses fifteen years ago?”

“Dwont’ee, now, call ’em names, Master Gaarge.”

“Good-bye, Betty, and make haste up to the Castle before all the small
boys are poisoned. I can give you a lift, Sir,” said he to me, “if
you’ll jump up behind.”

I thanked him, and got up behind, by the side of one of the other young
gentlemen, who I thought didn’t seem much to like having me there; and
I felt very pleased, as we bowled along the Ridgeway, passing all the
people who had been laughing at me and the donkey, that they should see
that I was in such good company, and should be up at the Castle before
any of them.

The whole Ridgeway was alive with holiday folk, some walking with
their coats and bonnets off, some in great wagons, some in all sorts
of strange vehicles, such as I had never seen before (many of which
Master George declared had been impressed by Alfred’s commissariat
and hospital staff, in his wars against the Danes, when they were
strong young traps); but from one and all there rose up a hum of broad
Berkshire, and merry laughter, as we shot by them. Sometimes a yeoman
in his gig, or on his stout hackney, would try to keep up with us, or
to stop us from passing him, but Master George was a reckless driver,
and somehow or another, galloping or trotting, on the right side or the
wrong, he _would_ pass; so in about ten minutes we had got over the two
miles of downs, and were close up to the Castle.

Here the first thing I saw was Joe, with two other farmers, carrying a
lot of little white and pink flags, and measuring ground.

“Please put me down, Sir,” said I, “there’s my friend.”

“Ah, yes,” said Master George, pulling up, “I see--you’re staying
with Farmer Hurst. Well, I’m much obliged to you for helping poor old
Betty--she’s a good struggling old widow body in our village; I’ve
known her ever since I could walk and suck. Good morning, Mr. Hurst;
likely to be a good muster to-day.”

“Mornin’, Sir,” said Joe, touching his hat, “I think so--there’s a
smart lot of folk in the Castle already.”

“Well, I hope we may meet again,” said Master George to me, “I won’t
forget the song for you,”--and away he drove towards the Castle.

“Why, Dick man, where’s the old horse?” said Joe, looking as if I had
come from the moon.

“Oh, I walked,” said I, “I prefer it, when I have time.”

“Come own it, Dick,” said he, “thou wast ashamed of the old horse’s
long rough coat--I didn’t think thou hadst been such a dandy.”

“Upon my honour it was nothing of the sort,” said I, glad enough that
he wasn’t on the right scent.

“And how did you get along with one of our young squires?” said he.

“Oh, he offered me a lift,” said I; and then I told him my story.

“Well, you always seem to fall on your legs,” said he; “who are they
with him?”

“Oxford scholars, I think,” said I, “from their talk; but I didn’t get
on much with them, they’re not so free spoken as he is. But what are
you about here, Joe?”

“Oh, helping the umpires to measure out the course for the cart-horse
race; look, there are the flags right along for half a mile, and the
finish is to be up there by the side of the Castle, for all the folk to
see. But come along, for I must be after the umpires; I see they want
me.”

“I think,” said I, “I should like to go and see what’s going on in the
Castle.”

“Very good,” said he, “then I’ll look after you when we’ve done this
job;” and away he went.

I wouldn’t take time to go round by either of the entrances, but made
straight across to the nearest point of the great earthworks, and
scrambled over the outer bank, and down into the deep ditch, and up the
inner bank, and stood there on the top, looking down on all the fun
of the fair; for fair it was already, though it was very little past
eleven o’clock in the morning.

There was the double line of booths and stalls which I had seen putting
up the day before, making a long and broad street, and all decked out
with nuts and apples, and ginger-bread, and all sorts of sucks and
food, and children’s toys, and cheap ribbons, knives, braces, straps,
and all manner of gaudy-looking articles. Opposite, on the north side,
all the shows had got their great pictures up of the wonders which
were to be seen inside, and the performers were strutting about on
the stages outside, and before one of them an acrobat was swinging
backwards and forwards on the slack rope, and turning head over heels
at the end of each swing. And every show had its own music, if it were
only a drum and pan pipes, and all the musicians were playing, as loud
as they could play, different tunes. Then, on the east side, were the
great booths of the publicans, all decked out now with flowers and
cheap flags, with their skittle-grounds behind; and lots of gypsies,
and other tramps, with their “three sticks a penny,” and other games.
The west side was only occupied, as I said before, by the great white
tent of the County Police, where the Committee were sitting, and Lord
Craven’s tents some way in front; but these looked pretty and gay now,
for they had hoisted some good flags; and there in the middle stood
the great ugly stage, and the greasy pole. The whole space was filled
with all sorts of people, from ladies looking as if they had just come
from Kensington Gardens, down to the ragged little gypsy children, with
brown faces and brick-coloured hair, all moving about, and looking very
much as if they were enjoying themselves. So after looking a minute, I
got down into the crowd, and set to work to see every thing I could.

I hadn’t been pushing about amongst the rest above five minutes, when
two men stopped close by me, one (who was the Wantage crier, I found
out afterwards) with his hand full of papers, and the other carrying a
gong, which he began to beat loud enough to deafen one. When the crowd
had come round him, the crier began, and I should think he might have
been heard at Elm Close:--

“Oh yes! oh yes! by order of the Committee, all persons who mean to
play for prizes, must enter their names on the umpires’ lists. Oh yes!
oh yes! the umpires’ lists are open in the tent, and names may be
entered from now till half-past twelve. Oh yes! a list of the umpires
for the different games and sports may be seen on the board outside the
tent-door. God save the Queen!”

As soon as he had done, he and the man with the gong went off to
another part of the Castle, but I could see some of the men and boys,
who had been standing round, sidling off towards the great tent to
enter for some of the games, as I guessed. So I followed across the
Castle to the space in front of the tent.

I could see, through the entrance, two or three of the Committee
sitting at a table, with paper and pens and ink before them; and every
now and then, from the little groups which were standing about, some
man would make a plunge in, and go up to the table; and, after a word
or two with them, would enter his name on one or more of the lists, and
then come out, sometimes grinning, but generally looking as if he were
half ashamed of himself. I remarked more and more through the day what
a shy, shamefaced fellow the real countryman was, while the gypsies
and racing boys and tramps, who entered for the races, but not for the
backsword or wrestling prizes, were all as bold as brass, and stood
chattering away to the Committee-men, till they were almost ordered out
of the tent.

I sat down on the turf outside the tent to watch; for I felt very
much interested in the games, and liked to see the sort of men who
came to enter. There were not many very stout or tall men amongst
them; I should say they averaged about eleven stone in weight, and
five feet eight inches in height; but they looked a very tough race;
and I could quite believe, while looking at them, what Joe told me
one day--“Though there’s plenty of quicker men, and here and there
stronger ones, scarce any man that ever comes down our way--either at
navigator’s work or loafing about, like the gypsies and tramps--can
ever come up to our chaps in _last_, whether at fighting or working.”

There was one man amongst them who struck me particularly, I suppose
because he wore a Crimean medal with four clasps, and went quite lame
on a crutch. I found out his history. Old Mattingly, the blacksmith of
Uffington, had three sons when the Russian war broke out. They all went
for soldiers. The first was shot through the hand, as that gray, deadly
dawn broke over Inkermann, on the 5th of November, 1854. Had he gone to
the rear he would probably have lived. He fought till the last Russian
vanished along the distant road, and over the bridge heaped with slain,
like a gallant Berkshire lad--and then went to hospital and died of his
wounds within a week. The second lies before Sebastopol in the advanced
trenches of the right attack. The third, the young artilleryman, went
through the whole war, and after escaping bayonet and shot and shell,
was kicked by the horse of a wounded officer, and probably lamed for
life. According to the rules of the service, my informant seemed to
think, he was not entitled to a pension for life, “but they had given
him one for eighteen months after his discharge, so that he had almost
a year of it to run; and perhaps he might learn blacksmith-work in that
time, if he could stand at all, for that was mostly arm-work.”

I didn’t know what the regulations as to pensions were, or how long
young Mattingly would take to learn blacksmith-work, but I did feel
rather ashamed that England couldn’t afford to do a little more for
such as he; and should be glad for my part to pay something towards it,
if the Chancellor of the Exchequer, or somebody, would find out a way
to set this right. Or perhaps if this should ever meet the eye of the
Commander-in-Chief, or of any of the gentlemen who were made K.C.B’s in
the war-time, or of any other person who has interest in the army, they
may see whether any thing more can be done for young Mattingly.

Many of the younger ones I could see hadn’t made up their minds whether
or no they should enter, and were larking and pushing one another
about; and I saw several good trials of strength, and got an idea of
what the wrestling was like before the lists were closed.

“Bi’st in for young geamsters prize at wrastlin’, shepherd?” asked
a young carter with his hat full of ribbons, of a tight-made,
neatly-dressed fellow, who had already won a second prize, I heard, at
his village revel.

The shepherd nodded.

“Mose, mun,” went on the carter, “thee shouldst go in. Thee bi’st big
enough.”

Moses was an overgrown, raw-boned fellow, of about eighteen, in a short
smock-frock and a pair of very dilapidated militia-trousers. He had
been turning the matter over in his own mind for some time, and now,
after looking the shepherd over for a minute, pulled his great hands
out of his pockets, hunched up his shoulders, and grunted out--

“’Zay! Try a file[30] wi’ thee, shepherd.”

The bystanders all cheered. Moses, the militiaman, was rather a joke to
them. The shepherd looked scornful, but was ready to try a file; but
he stipulated that Mose must borrow some shoes instead of his great,
iron-clouted high-lows, (no man is allowed to wrestle, I found, with
any iron on his shoes.)

This seemed likely to stop the fun. Moses pulled off his high-lows,
and appeared in sinkers,[31] at which everybody roared; but no shoes
were to be had. Then he offered to wrestle without shoes; but at last
a pair were found, and Moses advanced with his great hands stretched
out towards the shepherd, who, not deigning to take one hand out of his
pocket, caught Mose’s elbow with the other. After one or two awkward
attempts, and narrowly escaping some well-meant trips, Mose bored in;
and before the shepherd could seize the militiaman’s collar with his
second hand, over he went, and Mose was proclaimed winner of a file,
amid shouts of laughter. Then they buckled to again, the shepherd doing
his best; but somehow Mose managed to keep his legs; and when they went
down, both fell on their sides, and it was only a dog-fall.

In another minute I saw the militiaman in the tent before the table.

“Plaze, Sur, put down Moses Tilling--young geamster--wrastlin’.”

After watching the tent till the lists were just closing, I started
off to see if I could find Miss Lucy, who ought to have been up by
this time, and to get something to eat before the sports began. The
luncheon I managed easily enough, for I went over to the great booth in
which I had dined the day before, and sat down at the long table, where
Peter welcomed me, and soon gave me as much as I could eat and drink.
But when I had finished, and went out to look for my friends, I found
it a very difficult business, and no wonder, for there were more than
20,000 people up on the Hill.

First I went to the outside of the Castle, where all the carriages were
drawn up in long rows, to see if I could find the four-wheel amongst
them. As I was poking about, I came close to a fine open carriage,
and hearing a shout of merry laughter, looked up. There were a party
at lunch; two ladies and some quite young girls inside, some boys on
the box, and several gentlemen standing round, holding bottles and
sandwiches; and they were all eating and drinking, and laughing at an
old gypsy woman, who was telling the fortune of one of the ladies.

“Love’ll never break your heart, my pretty lady,” said the old woman;
“let the Norwood gypsy see your hand, my pretty lady.”

The lady held out her right hand, and the little girls glanced at the
lady, and one another, brimming with fun.

“It’s the other hand the gypsy ought to see. Ah, well, then, never
mind,” she went on, as the lady looked quietly in her face, without
moving a muscle, “the old Norwood gypsy can read it all in your eyes.
There’s a dark gentleman, and a light gentleman, who’ll both be coming
before long; there’ll be sore hearts over it, but the richest will win
before a year’s out--” Here the girls clapped their hands, and burst
into shouts, and the lady showed her other hand with a wedding-ring on,
and went on quietly with her lunch.

“Ah! I never said she wasn’t married!” said the gipsy to the girls,
who only laughed the more. I had got quite close up to the carriage,
and at this moment caught the eye of the lady, who was laughing too;
then I felt awkward all at once, and as if I was where I had no right
to be. But she didn’t look the least annoyed, and I was passing on,
when I saw that Mr. Warton was amongst the gentlemen on the other side
of the carriage. “Ah,” thought I, “I wonder if he’ll know me now he’s
with his fine friends?” But the next minute I was ashamed of myself
for doubting, for I heard him wish them good-bye, and before I was ten
yards from the carriage, he put his arm in mine.

“Well, you never rode after all,” he began.

“No, Sir,” said I. “But where are they? I haven’t seen Joe this two
hours.”

“Oh, not far off,” said he; “feeding, like the rest of us.”

And further down the line we found Joe, and Miss Lucy, and several
friends of theirs, lunching on the turf by the four-wheel. So we sat
down with them, but I didn’t half like the way in which Miss Lucy was
running on with two young farmers, one on each side of her. She told
me afterwards that she had known them ever since they were children
together, but somehow that didn’t seem to me to mend the matter much.
And then again, when Joe got up, and said it was time to move, for the
sports would be just beginning, nothing would serve her but to walk
off to Wayland Smith’s cave. I wonder whether she did it a little bit
to provoke me; for she knew that I had been to see it the day before,
and that I wanted particularly to see all the sports. But I don’t think
it could have been that after all, for when I said I should stay with
Joe, she was just as pleasant as ever, and didn’t seem to mind a bit
whether I or any one else went with her or not.

I am afraid I shall make a very poor hand at telling about the sports,
because I couldn’t be in five or six places at once; and so I was kept
running about, from the stage in the middle of the Castle out on to
the downs to see the cart-horse race, and then back again into the
Castle for the jingling match, and then out on the other side to the
manger for the cheese races, and so on backwards and forwards; seeing
the beginning of one sport, and the end of another, and the middle of
a third. I wish the Committee would let the sports begin earlier, and
then one might be able to see them all. However I must do the best I
can, and just put down what I saw myself.

The first move for the sports was made a little before one, just as
I got back into the Castle, after seeing Miss Lucy start for Wayland
Smith’s cave. The Committee came out of their tent in a body, each
man carrying the lists of the entries for the sports over which he
was to preside. But instead of going different ways, each to his own
business, they walked across in a body to the stage, and stopped just
underneath it, in the middle of a great crowd of men and boys; and then
they shouted for silence, and the chairman spoke:--

“We wish to say a few words, my men, to those who are going to play
with the sticks or wrestle to-day. There has been a good deal of talk
about these sports, as you all know; and many persons think they
shouldn’t be allowed at all now-a-days--that the time for them has
gone by. They say, that men always lose their tempers and get brutal
at these sports. We have settled, however, to give the old-fashioned
games a fair trial; and it will rest with yourselves whether we shall
ever be able to offer prizes for them again. For, depend upon it, if
there is any savage work to-day, if you lose your tempers, and strike
or kick one another unfairly, you will never see any more wrestling or
backsword on White Horse Hill. But we are sure we can trust you, and
that there won’t be any thing to find fault with. Only remember again,
you are on your trial, and the stage will be cleared at once, and no
prizes given, if any thing objectionable happens. And now, you can put
to as soon as you like.”

The Committee then marched off, leaving a very large crowd round the
stage, all eager for the play to begin.

The two umpires got up on to the stage, and walked round, calling out,
“Two old gamesters at backsword, and two old gamesters at wrastlin’,
wanted to put to.” But I suppose the chairman’s speech had rather taken
the men by surprise, for no one came forward, though there was a crowd
twenty deep round the stage.

“Who are the old gamesters?” I asked of the man next me.

“Them as has won or shared a first prize at any revel,” answered he,
without looking round.

After a minute the chairman’s brother, who didn’t seem to have much
scruple about these sports, jumped up on the stage, and blew an old
French hunting-horn, till the young ones began to laugh; and then told
the men not to be afraid to come up, for if they didn’t begin at once
there wouldn’t be light to play out the ties.

At last there was a stir amongst the knot of Somersetshire men, who
stood together at one corner of the stage; and one of them, stepping
up, pitched on to it his stumpy black hat, and then climbed up after it
himself, spoke a word to the umpires, and began handling the sticks, to
choose one which balanced to his mind, while the umpires proclaimed,
“An old gamester wanted, to play with John Bunn of Wedmore.”

“There he stands, you see,” said Master George, who was close by me,
though I hadn’t seen him before, “the only remaining representative of
the old challenger at tourneys ready to meet all comers. He ought to
have a herald to spout out his challenge in verse. Why not?”

“I don’t know what he could say more than the umpire has, Sir,” said I.

“He might blow his own trumpet at any rate,” said he; “somehow thus;”
and he repeated, after a false start or two,--

THE ZONG OF THE ZUMMERZETSHIRE OWLD GEAMSTER.

                   I.

    “Cham[32] a Zummerzetshire mun
      Coom her to hev a bit o’vun.
    Oo’lt[33] try a bout? I be’ant aveard
      Ov any man or mother’s zun.

                   II.

    “Cham a geamster owld and tough,
      Well knowed droo all the country zide,
    And many a lusty Barkshire man
      To break my yead hev often tried.

                   III.

    “Who’s vor a bout o vriendly plaay,
      As never should to anger move?
    Zich spwoorts wur only meaned vor thaay
      As likes their mazzards broke for love.”

John Bunn looked by no means a safe man to play with. He stood about
five feet eleven, with spare long muscular limbs, a sallow complexion,
and thick shock head of black hair,--a good defence in itself against
any common blow of a stick. But now that the ice was broken, his
challenge was soon answered; and George Gregory, of Stratton, one of
the best mowers in the Vale, appeared to uphold the honour of Berks
and Wilts. He stood half a head shorter than his opponent, but was,
probably, the stronger man of the two, and had a sturdy and confident
look, which promised well, and was fair-haired, and, like David,
ruddy to look upon.

[Illustration]

While they were taking off coats and waistcoats, and choosing sticks,
two wrestlers got up on the stage, and showed the shoes in which they
were going to wrestle to the umpires, for approval; and stood at the
ropes, ready to begin as soon as the first bout at backsword was over.
The crowd drew a long breath, while Bunn and Gregory came forward,
shook hands; and then throwing up their guards, met in the middle of
the stage.

At the first rattle of the sticks, the crowd began cheering again,
and pressed in closer to the stage; and I with them, for it was very
exciting, _that_ I felt at once. The coolness and resolution in the
faces of the two men, as they struck and parried with those heavy
sticks, trying all the points of each other’s play in a dozen rapid
exchanges; the skill and power which every turn of the wrist showed;
and the absolute indifference with which they treated any chance blow
which fell on arm or shoulder, made it really a grand sight; and with
all my prejudices I couldn’t help greatly admiring the players. “Bout,”
cried Bunn, after a minute or so, and down came their guards, and they
walked to the side of the stage to collect coppers from the crowd below
in the baskets of their sticks, while the two first wrestlers put to in
the middle.

I suppose there are more unsettled points in wrestling, or it is harder
to see whether the men are playing fair, for the crowd was much more
excited now than at the backsword play, a hundred voices shouting to
the umpires every moment to stop this or that practice. Besides, the
kicking, which is allowed at elbow and collar wrestling, makes it look
brutal very often; and so I didn’t like it so much as the backsword
play, though the men were fine, good-tempered fellows, and, when most
excited, only seemed to want what they called “fair doos.”

I stopped by the stage until Gregory had lost his head. How it happened
I couldn’t see, but suddenly the umpires cried out “Blood!” The men
stopped; Gregory put up his hand to his hair, found that the blood was
really coming, and then dropped his stick and got down, quite as much
surprised as I was. And two more old gamesters were called up, the
first head being to Somersetshire.

But now I heard that the cart-horse race was just coming off, and so
following the crowd, made my way across to the east of the Castle.

I scrambled up to the highest part of the bank, and so got a capital
view of the scene below. The course was marked out all the way down
to the starting-post by rows of little pink and white flags, and the
Committee-men were riding slowly up and down, trying to get the people
to keep back behind the flags. The line was, on the whole, pretty
well kept; but as the crowd got thicker every minute, every now and
then a woman with two or three children would wander out to escape
the pressure from behind; or a young couple keeping company would run
across, hoping to better their position; or a lot of uproarious boys
would start out for a lark, to try the tempers, and very possibly the
whips, of the Committee.

Joe presently rode by the place where I was standing, and called out to
me to come down and see the mounting. So I slipped out of the crowd,
and ran down the back of the line to the starting-place. There I found
the Squire and the umpires, passing the men and horses. Five or six
were all ready; the great horses in their thill harness, which jingled
and rattled with every movement; and the carters perched up in the
middle of the wood and leather and brass, in their white smock-frocks,
with the brims of their break-of-days turned up in front, and a bunch
of ribbons fluttering from the side, and armed with the regular long
cart-whip. Just as I came up, Mr. Avery Whitfield’s bay horse, “King of
the Isle,” was passed, and took his place with the others. He was one
of the three favourites, I heard people say.

“Call the next horse.”

“Mr. Davenport’s gray mare, Dairymaid,” shouts the umpire. Here she
comes with old Joe Humphries, the jockey and horse breaker, on her
back. He is in full jockey costume--cap, jacket, and tops, with a
racing whip and spurs. The umpires look doubtfully at him, and consult
the Squire. At first they seem inclined not to let Joe ride at all, but
as the owners of the other horses don’t object, they only insist on his
taking off his spurs and changing his whip for a common long carter’s
whip. Then Dairymaid is passed, and then one other horse; eight in all.
Two of the Committee gallop down in front to clear the course for the
last time; the word “Off” is given; and away go the great steeds in
furious plunging gallop, making the whole hill shake beneath them, and
looking (as I heard one of the Oxford scholars remark) like a charge of
German knights in some old etching. Close after them came the umpires,
the Committee-men, and all the mounted farmers, cheering and shouting
pieces of advice to the riders; and the crowd, as they pass, shout and
wave their hats, and then rush after the horses. How everybody isn’t
killed, and how those men can sit those great beasts in the middle of
that rattling mass of harness, were my puzzles, as I scrambled along
after the rest.

Meantime, in the race, Dairymaid shoots at once some yards ahead,
and improves her lead at every stride; for she is a famous mare, and
old Joe Humphries understands the tricks of the course, and can push
her and lift her in ways unknown to the honest carters and foggers,
who come lumbering behind him--Joe even has time for a contemptuous
glance over his shoulder at his pursuers. But the race is not always
to the swift, at least not to those who are swiftest at starting.
Half-way up the course, Dairymaid ceases to gain; then she shows signs
of distress, and scarcely answers to Joe’s persuasions. “King of the
Isle” is creeping up to her--the carter shakes his bridle, and begins
to ply his long cart-whip--they are crossing the Ridgeway, where
stand the carter’s fellow-servants, Mr. Whitfield’s fogger, shepherd,
ploughboys, &c. who set up a shout as he passes, which sends the bay
right up abreast of the mare. No wonder they are excited, for the
master has promised that the three guineas, the price of the new thill
harness, shall be divided between them, if the bay wins.

In another fifty yards he is drawing ahead. All old Joe’s efforts are
in vain; his jockeyship has only done him harm, whereas the carter’s
knowledge of what his steed’s real powers are, has been the making of
him, and he rides in, brandishing his long cart-whip, an easy winner.

Dairymaid is second, but only just before the ruck; and old Joe creeps
away, let us hope, a humbler and a wiser man.

Of course I couldn’t see all this myself, because I was behind, but Joe
told me all about the race directly afterwards. When I got up there was
a great crowd round “King of the Isle,” from whose back the carter was
explaining something about the race. But I couldn’t stay to listen,
for I heard that the races for the “prime coated Berkshire fives” (as
they called the cheeses), were just coming off; so I hurried away to
the brow of the hill, just above the Horse, where it is steepest; for I
wanted of all things to see how men could run down this place, which I
couldn’t get up without using both hands.

There stood Mr. William Whitfield, of Uffington, the umpire who had
to start the race, in his broad-brimmed beaver, his brown coat and
waistcoat with brass buttons, and drab breeches and gaiters. I thought
him a model yeoman to look at, but I didn’t envy him his task. Two
wild-looking gypsy women, with their elf-locks streaming from under
their red handkerchiefs, and their black eyes flashing, were rushing
about amongst the runners, trying to catch some of their relations who
were going to run; and screaming out that their men should never break
their limbs down that break-neck place. The gypsies dodged about, and
kept out of their reach, and the farmer remonstrated, but the wild
women still persevered. Then, losing all patience, he would turn and
poise the wheel, ready to push it over the brow, when a shout from the
bystanders warns him to pause, and, a little way down the hill, just in
the line of the race, appear two or three giggling lasses, hauled along
by their sweethearts, and bent on getting a very good view. Luckily at
this moment the Chairman appeared, and rode his white horse down to the
front of the line of men, where there seemed to me to be footing for
nothing but a goat. Then the course was cleared for a moment, he moved
out of the line, making a signal to the farmer, who pushed the wheel
at once over the brow, and cried, “Off.” The wheel gained the road in
three bounds, cleared it in a fourth monster bound which measured forty
yards, and hurried down far away to the bottom of the manger, where the
other two umpires were waiting to decide who is the winner of the race.

[Illustration]

Away go the fourteen men in hot pursuit, gypsies, shepherds, and
light-heeled fellows of all sorts, helter-skelter; some losing their
foothold at once, and rolling or slipping down; some still keeping
their footing, but tottering at every step; one or two, with their
bodies well thrown back, striking their heels firmly into the turf,
and keeping a good balance. They are all in the road together, but
here several fall on their faces, and others give in; the rest cross
it in a moment, and are away down the manger. Here the sheep-walks,
which run temptingly along the sides of the manger, but if they would
look forward will take the runners very little nearer the bottom where
the wheel lies, mislead many; and amongst the rest, the fleetest of
the gypsies, who makes off at full speed along one of them. Two or
three men go still boldly down the steep descent, falling and picking
themselves up again; and Jonathan Legg, of Childrey, is the first of
these. He has now gained the flat ground at the bottom, where after
a short stagger he brings himself up, and makes straight for the
umpires and the wheel. The gypsy now sees his error; and turning short
down the hill, comes into the flat, running some twenty yards behind
Jonathan. In another hundred yards he would pass him, for he gains at
every stride; but it is too late; and we, at the top of the hill, cheer
loudly when we see Jonathan, the man who had gone straight all the way,
touch the wheel a clear ten yards before his more active rival.

I should have liked to have seen the boys’ races down the manger, but
was afraid of missing some other sport, so I left farmer Whitfield
at his troublesome post, shouting out the names of the boys and
trying to get them into line, and went back into the Castle, where I
found a crowd round the greased pole; and when I got up to it, saw a
heavy-looking fellow, standing some five feet up the pole, with one
foot in a noose of cord depending from a large gimlet, and the other
leg hooked round the pole. He held in his right hand another large
gimlet, which he was preparing to screw into the pole to support
a second noose, and gazed stolidly down at a Committee-man, who
was objecting “that this wasn’t fair climbing--that if gimlets and
nooses were to be allowed, he could get up himself.” I thought he was
right; but public feeling seemed to side with the climber; so the
Committee-man gave in, declaring that there would be no more legs of
mutton to climb for, if any thing but arms and legs were to be used.

“Rather a slow bit of sport this,” I said to an old gray-headed
man, who was leaning on his stick at my side, and staring up at the
performer.

“Ees, Zur,” answered he, “I dwon’t knaow but what it be.”

“Do you call it fair climbing, now?”

“Auh, bless’ee, not I. I minds seein’ the young chaps when I wur a
buoy, climin’ maypowls a deal higher nor that, dree at a time. But
now-a-days ’um be lazy, and afraid o’ spwiling their breeches wi’ the
grase.”

“Are there any maypoles about here now?”

“Never a one as I knows on, Zur, for twenty mile round. The last as I
remembers wur the Longcott one, and Parson Watts of Uffington had he
sawed up nigh forty year ago, for fear lest there should ha’ been some
murder done about ’un.”

“Murder about a maypole! Why, how was that?”

“Auh! you see, Zur, this here Longcott maypowl wur the last in all
these parts, and a wur the envy of a zight o’ villages round about. Zo,
one cluttery[34] night in November, thirty of our Ashbury chaps thay
started down to Longcott, and dug ’un up, and brought ’un cler away on
handspikes, all the waay to the Crown’d Inn at Ashbury, and ’tis quite
vour mil’d.”

“On handspikes! Why, how big was he, then?”

“Augh! a fyeightish sized ’un. How big? whoy a sight bigger, bless’ee,
nor that ’un, and all the bottom half on ’un solid oak. When thay cum
to put ’un up afore the bar winder of the Crown’d, a reached right
up auver the tops o’ the housen. But zoon arter a wur put up, the
Uffington chaps cum up, and tuk and carried ’un down ther’. Ther’ was a
smartish row or two about ’un at Uffington arter that, but they watched
’un night and day; and when the Lambourn chaps cum arter ’un one night,
they chucked scaldin’ water right auver’m. Zo then Parson Watts, he
tuk and sawed ’un up, and guv ’un to the owld women at Christmas for
virewood.”

I walked away from the pole, turning over in my mind whether Parson
Watts was right or wrong in his summary method of restoring peace to
his parish, and, somehow or other, found myself again close under the
stage. Now, and throughout the day, I found no flagging there; whenever
I passed there was the crowd of men standing round, and the old and
young gamesters hard at work. So I began to believe what Joe had said,
that the countrymen thought more about these games than any thing else,
and wouldn’t care to go to the pastime if they were stopped.

I found that the Ashbury men were carrying it all their own way in the
wrestling, and that their champion, old Richens (the rat-catcher, an
old gamester in his fiftieth year), would probably not even have to
wrestle at all; for his own men were throwing all the gamesters of the
other parishes, and of course would give up to him when it came to the
last ties. The men all wrestle in sides, at least the old gamesters do;
so that a man generally plays for his parish, and not for his own head,
which is a better thing, I think.

As to the backsword play, the stage was strewed with splinters of
sticks and pieces of broken baskets, and many a young gamester has had
his first broken head in public. But, for the chief prize, matters are
going hard with Berks and Wilts. The Somersetshire old gamesters have
won two heads to one; and, as they have six men in, and Berks and Wilts
only four, the odds are all in favour of the cider county, and against
the beer drinkers.

In good time up gets an old gamester, who looks like the man to do
credit to the royal county. It is Harry Seeley, of Shrivenham, the only
Berkshire man in; for there has been some difference between Berks and
Wilts, and Harry’s two mates haven’t entered at all. So he, being one
of the true bull-dog breed, is in for his own head, against all odds,
and is up to play the next Somersetshire man.

Harry is a fine specimen of an Englishman. Five feet eight high, with
a bullet head, and light blue eye; high-couraged, cool, and with an
absolutely imperturbable temper. He plays in a blue shirt, thin from
age and wear, through which you may see the play of his splendid arms
and chest. His opponent is a much younger man, about the same size; but
a great contrast to Harry, for he has a savage and sly look about him.

They shake hands, throw themselves into position, and the bout begins.
Harry is clearly the finer player, and his adversary feels this at
once; and the shouts of anticipated victory, in the Berkshire tongue,
rouse his temper.

Now comes a turn of the savage play, which ought never to be seen on a
stage. The Somerset man bends far back, and strikes upper cuts at the
face and arms, and then savagely at the body. He is trying to maim and
cow, and not to win by fair brave play. The crowd soon begin to get
savage too; upper-cutting is not thought fair in Berks and Wilts; a
storm begins to brew, hard words are bandied, and a cry of “Foul,” and
“Pull him down,” is heard more than once, and the Committee man, who
watches from below, is on the point of stopping the bout.

But nothing puts out old Harry Seeley; no upper cut can reach his face,
for his head is thrown well back, and his guard is like a rock; and
though the old blue shirt is cut through and through, he makes no more
of the welts of the heavy stick than if it were a cat’s tail. Between
the bouts his face is cheery and confident, and he tells his friends to
“hold their noise, and let him alone to tackle the chap,” as he hands
round his basket for the abounding coppers.

Now I could see well enough why the parsons don’t like these games.
It gave me a turn, to watch the faces round the stage getting savage,
and I could see what it might soon get to if there was much of this
wild work. And there were Master George, and the two Oxford scholars,
at the opposite corner of the stage, shouting till they were hoarse
for old Seeley, and as savage and wicked-looking as any of the men
round them; setting such a bad example, too, as I thought,--whereas it
didn’t matter for a fellow like me, who was nobody,--so I shouted, and
threw my coppers to old Seeley, and felt as wild as any of them, I do
believe. Three bouts, four bouts pass; Harry’s stick gets in oftener
and oftener. Has the fellow no blood in him? There it comes at last!
In the fifth bout, Harry’s stick goes flashing in again, a fair down
blow from the wrist, which puts the matter beyond all question, as the
Somersetshire man staggers back across the stage, the blood streaming
from under his hair. Loud are the shouts which greet the fine-tempered
old gamester, as he pulls on his velveteen coat, and gets down from the
stage.

“Why, Harry, thou’dst broke his yead second bout, mun, surely!” shout
his admirers.

“No,” says Harry, dogmatically, “you see, mates, there’s no ’cumulation
of blood belongs to thay cider-drinking chaps, as there does to we
as drinks beer. Besides, thay drinks vinegar allus for a week afore
playin’, which dries up most o’ the blood as they _has_ got; so it
takes a ’mazin’ sight of cloutin’ to break their yeads as should be.”

After this bout all the other play seemed to be tasteless; so,
promising myself to come back and see the ties played off, (unless
Miss Lucy turned up in the mean time, in which case I shouldn’t have
dared to go near the stage, and in fact I felt rather nervous already,
lest she should have seen or heard of me there,) I marched off, and
joined the crowd which was collecting round the jingling ring. That
crowd was one of the pleasantest sights of the whole day. The jingling
match seemed a very popular sport, especially with the women. There
they were, of all ranks--for I’m certain I saw some young ladies in
riding habits, and others in beautiful muslins, whom I, and Jem Fisher,
and little Neddy have often seen riding with very great people in
the Park, when we have managed to get down to Rotten Row on summer
evenings--seated on the grass or standing round the ring, in all sorts
of dresses, from fine silks down to cottons at 2_d._ a yard, and all
looking pleasant and good-tempered, and as if they were quite used to
being mixed up like this every day--which I’m sure I wish they were,
for my part, especially if the men were allowed to join in the crowd
too, as we were round the jingling ring. For there were gentlemen, both
parsons and others, and farmers, and ploughboys, and all manner of
other men and boys.

I don’t know what sort of fun a jingling match is in general, but
I thought this one much the slowest game I saw. The ring must have
been forty yards across, or thereabouts, and there were only eight
blindfolded men running after the bellman. To make it good fun, there
should have been twenty-five or thirty at least. Then the bellman, who
has his hands tied behind him, ought to have the bell tied round his
neck, or somewhere where he can’t get at it to stop the ringing; but
our bellman had the bell tied to his waistband behind, so that he could
catch hold of it with his hands, and stop it when he was in danger.
Then half the men could see, I’m sure, by the way they carried their
heads up in the air, especially one gypsy, who, I think, won the prize
at last. The men who couldn’t see were worth watching, for they kept
catching and tumbling over one another. One time they made a rush to
the rope, just where some of the young ladies were sitting, and, as
nearly as could be, tumbled over among them. I thought there would have
been a great scrambling and screaming; not a bit of it--they never
flinched an inch, or made the least cry, and I was very proud to think
they were my countrywomen. After the bellman had been caught about a
minute, there was a great laugh at one of the blinded men, who made a
rush, and caught a Committee-man, who was standing in the ring, in his
arms. But on the whole, I thought the game a poor one, and was glad
when it was over.

I hurried away directly after the jingling match, and went across the
Castle, and out on to the down where the cart-horse race had been run
to see the foot-races, which were run over the last half of the same
course, on which ten good stiff sets of hurdles, at short distances
apart, had been set up. I found a debate going on between the umpires
and some of the men as to whether they were all to start together. The
regular agricultural labourers were remonstrating as to some of the
candidates.

“It bean’t narra mossel o’ use for we chaps to start along wi’ thay
light-heeled gentry,” said one,--“Whoy, look ’ee here, zur’s one, and
yander’s another, wi’ a kind o’ dancin’ pumps on, and that ’un at
tother end wi’ a cricketin’ waistcut.”

“And there’s two o’ them little jockey chaps amongst ’em, sumweres,
Zur,” said another, looking about for these young gentlemen, who dodged
behind some of the bigger candidates.

“How can we help that?” said the umpire.

“Auh, Zur, thay be all too nimble by half for we to be of any account
to ’em,” persisted the first speaker. “If twur for the sticks now, or
wrastling--”

“Well, but what shall we do then?” interrupted the umpire.

“Let I pick out ten or a dozen on ’em to run by theirselves.” The
umpires proposed this to the rest, and, no one objecting, told Giles,
the protester, to pick out the ten he was most afraid of. This Giles
proceeded to do with a broad grin on his face, and generally seemed to
make a good selection. But presently he arrived at, and after a short
inspection passed over, a young fellow in his blue shirt-sleeves and a
cloth cap, who to the umpire’s eye seemed a dangerous man.

“Why, Giles,” said he, “you’re never going to pass him over?”

“Auh, ees, Zur,” said Giles, “let he ’bide along wi’ we chaps. Dwont’ee
zee, he’s a tipped and naayled ’un?”

When Giles had finished his selection, the first lot were started, and
made a grand race; which was won by a Hampshire man from Kingsclere,
the second man, not two feet behind, being a young Wiltshire farmer,
who, having never been beaten in his own neighbourhood, had come to
lose his laurels honourably at the Scouring.

The running in the second race was, of course, not so good, but much
more amusing. The “tipped and naayled ’uns” were a rushing lot, but
very bad at rising. Hurdle after hurdle went down before them with a
crash, and the most wonderful summersaults were executed. The second
hurdle finished poor Giles, who charged it manfully, and found himself
the next moment on his broad back, gazing placidly up into the evening
sky. The cloth cap, notwithstanding his shoes, went easily ahead, and
won in a canter. I heard one of the umpires rallying Giles afterwards
at his want of eyes.

“Ees, Zur,” said Giles, hunching up his great shoulders, “I wur tuk in,
zure enough. He wur a town chap, arter all, as wouldn’t ha’ knowed a
piece o’ clumpers afore he cum across to White Hos Hill.”

I left the umpires now to start the other races, and got back once
again into the Castle. I was now beginning to get very tired in my
legs, though not in my spirits, so I went and sat down outside the
crowd, which was thicker than ever round the stage, for the ties were
being played out. I could hear the umpires call every now and then
for some gamester who was not forthcoming to play out his tie--“John
Giles, if you beant on the stage in five minutes, to put to with James
Higgins, you shall lose your head”--through all the cheers and shouts,
which rose louder and louder now that every blow or trip might decide
the prizes. And while I was sitting, the donkey races were run outside,
and I heard were very good fun; especially the last one, in which no
man rode his own donkey, and the last donkey had the prize. I hope my
friend, the old suck-woman, entered neighbour Thorne’s beast, for if
she did, I’ll be bound he carried off the prize for her. They were the
only sports that I didn’t manage to see something of.

It was now just five o’clock, the hour for the pig-race, which seemed
to be a most popular sport, for most of the lookers-on at the stage
went off to see it, leaving only a select crowd of old and young
gamesters, most of whom had been playing themselves, and whom nothing
could drag five yards from the posts until the ties were all played
out. I was just considering whether I should move or stay where I was,
when Master George came striding by and caught sight of me.

“Hullo,” said he, “how is it you’re not on the move? You must see the
pig-race; come along.” So I got up and shambled along with him.

The pig was to be started on the slope below the west entrance, where
the old gentleman had stood and lectured me the day before about Earl
Sidroc. There was the spring cart, covered with a net, with a fine
young Berkshire pig in it, just at the place where the Bersirkir (as
he called them) made their last stand. When we came up, the runners,
thirty in number, with their coats and waistcoats off, were just being
drawn up in line inside the Castle, from which place they were to be
started, and run down through the west entrance out on to the open
down, at the word “off.” It was thought that this rush down between
the double banks, covered thickly with the crowd, would be the finest
sight of the race. But the rush never came. Piggy was to have five
minutes law, and the Committee-man who went down to turn him out put
his snout towards Ashdown Park, and gave him a push in hopes that he
would take straight away over the downs, and so get a good start. Of
course, he turned right round and came trotting and grunting up towards
the Castle, to see what all the bustle could be about. Then the crowd
began to shout at him, and to press further and further down the outer
earthworks, though all the Committee were there to keep the course
clear for the regular runners; and at last, before half of the five
minutes were over, the whole line broke up with a great shout, and the
down was covered in a moment with countless men and boys in full chase
of Piggy. Then the lawful candidates could stand it no longer, and
away they went too, cleaving their way through the press, the Committee
riding after them as fast as was safe in such a crowd, to see fair play
if possible at the finish.

In a minute or two, Piggy was mobbed, surrounded, seized first by
one of the crowd, and then by a lawful runner. These tumbled over in
their struggle without loosing their hold and more of their friends
over them, and from the middle of the mass poor Piggy sent up the most
vigorous and dismal squeals, till the Committee-men rode in, laying
about with their whips; and Farmer Whitfield, springing off, seized
Piggy, and in another minute was cantering away with him towards
Wayland Smith’s cave. Here he was turned out again for a fair race,
and was won by Charles Ebury, of Fernham; who, fearing the results of
his racing performances, sold him at once for 10_s._ to the Woolston
carrier. But I am happy to say that he wasn’t really hurt, for I went
to see him some days afterwards, and found him as hearty as pig could
be.

Master George and I agreed, as we walked back to the Castle, that it is
a shame to have a pig-race.

“No,” said he, “let men run any risk they like of broken heads or limbs
for themselves; they may play or not as they like. But Piggy has no
choice, and to let him run the risk of having the legs pulled out of
his body before he is wanted for pork, isn’t fair.”

“He didn’t seem to think it was, certainly, Sir,” I said.

“No,” said he, laughing; “did you ever hear such a song as he made? No
animal can talk like a pig. He can scold or remonstrate just as well as
a Christian. Any one who knows the language can tell you just what he
is saying. Well,” he went on, “I see you don’t believe me; now I will
go and hear what he has to say about this proceeding, and give you it
word for word.”

[Illustration]

This was what he gave me afterwards, with the other songs he had
promised me:--

THE LAY OF THE HUNTED PIG.

    “Vathers, mothers, mothers’ zons!
    You as loves yer little wuns!
    Happy pegs among the stubble,
    Listen to a tale of trouble;
    Listen, pegs in yeard and stye,
    How the Barkshire chaps zard I.

    “I wur barn at Kingstone-Lisle,
    Wher I vrolicked var a while,
    As vine a peg as e’er wur zeen
    (One of a litter o’ thirteen)
    Till zome chaps wi’ cussed spite
    Aimed ov I to make a zite,
    And to have a ‘bit o’ vun,’
    Took I up to Uffington.

    “Up, vorights[35] the Castle mound
    They did zet I on the ground;
    Then a thousand chaps, or nigh,
    Runned and hollered arter I--
    Ther, then, I till I wur blowed,
    Runned and hollered all I knowed,
    When, zo zure as pegs is pegs,
    Eight chaps ketched I by the legs,
    Two to each--’tis truth I tell ’ee--
    Dree more clasped I round the belly!
    Under all they fellers lyin’--
    Pegs!--I thought as I wur dyin’.

    “But the Squire (I thenks I zee un),
    Varmer Whitfield ridin’ wi’ un,
    Fot I out o’ all thuck caddle,
    Stretched athurt the varmer’s zaddle--
    Bless ’em, pegs in yeard and stye,
    Them two vrends as stuck to I.

    “Barkshire men, vrom Hill and Vale,
    All as ever hears this tale,
    If to spwoort you be inclined,
    Plaze to bear this here in mind--
    Pegs beant made no race to win,
    Be zhart o’ wind, and tight o’ skin,
    Dwont’ee hunt ’em, but instead
    At backswyrd break each other’s yead
    Cheezes down the manger rowl--
    Or try and clim the greasy powl.

    “Pegs! in stubble yeard and stye,
    May you be never zard like I,
    Nor druv wi greasy ears and tail,
    By men and bwoys drough White Horse Vale.”

[29] “Scawt”--to get up.

[30] “File”--a fall.

[31] “Sinkers”--stockings without feet.

[32] “Cham”--“I am,” a form still used in parts of Somersetshire.

[33] “Oo’lt”--wilt thou.

[34] “Cluttery”--pelting with rain.

[35] “Vorights”--opposite.




CHAPTER VII.


Master George slipped away from me somehow, after the pig-race, so I
strolled up into the Castle again. The sports were all over, so the
theatres and shows were making a greater noise than ever, but I didn’t
feel inclined to go to any of them, and kept walking slowly round the
bank on the opposite side, and looking down at the fair. In a minute
or two I heard cheering, and saw an open carriage, with postilions,
driving out of the Castle, and three or four young ladies and a
gentleman or two cantering along with it. I watched them for some way
across the downs, and thought how nice it must be to be able to ride
well, and to have nice horses to go galloping over the springy downs,
into the golden sunset, putting up the larks and beautiful little
wheatears; and, besides all that, to have all the people cheering one
too! So down I went into the crowd, to find out who they were. It was
Lord Craven and his party, the first man I came across told me; and
then I quite understood why this carriage should be the only one to
come inside the Castle, and why the people should cheer; because, you
see, the White Horse, and Dragon’s Hill, and the Manger, all belong to
him, and he is very good-natured in letting everybody go there and do
pretty much what they please. There were other carriages going off now
from the row outside, and coachmen bringing up their horses to harness,
and a few of the foot people who came from the longest distances,
starting along the Ridgeway, or down the Uffington Road. I was standing
watching all this, and thinking how I was to find my party, and whether
I should go behind in the four-wheel (which I began to feel very much
inclined to do, for I was getting tired, and it would be dark), when I
saw Joe bustling about amongst the crowd, and looking out for some one;
so I made across to him.

“Ah, there you are,” said he, as soon as he caught sight of me, “I’ve
been hunting for you; it’s all over for to-day. Lu sent me after you
to come and have some tea. If you like, you can go home directly
afterwards with her and Mr. Warton.”

I was much pleased to hear that Miss Lucy had sent after me, but I
didn’t want to show it.

“What are you going to do?” said I.

“Oh,” said Joe, “I shan’t leave till all the Committee go; I must be
at the giving away of the prizes in the tent; and then, if any thing
should happen afterwards--any row, you know, or that sort o’ thing--I
shouldn’t like to be gone.”

I didn’t say any thing more, as I thought I might just as well leave
it open; so I followed him to the west side of the Castle, where the
police tent stood, and it was quite quiet.

“Here they are,” said Joe, “over in the ditch;” and he scrambled up
the bank, and I after him, and in the ditch below sure enough was
a most cozy tea-party. Miss Lucy, with her bonnet off, was sitting
cutting up a cake, and generally directing. Two other young women, nice
fresh-looking girls, but not to be named with her, were setting out a
few cups and saucers and plates, which they had borrowed from some of
the stalls. Mr. Warton was on his knees with his hat off, blowing away
till he was red in the face at a little fire made of chips and pieces
of old hampers, over which the kettle, also borrowed, hung from three
sticks driven into the ground so that their tops met above the fire.
Two or three young farmers sat about looking on, or handing things as
they were wanted, except one impudent young fellow of about eighteen,
with scarcely a hair on his chin, who was almost in Miss Lucy’s pocket,
and was meddling with every thing she was doing.

“Well, here you are, at last,” said she, looking up at us; “why, where
have you been all day?”

“I am sure I have been hunting after you very often,” said I, which,
perhaps, was rather more than I ought to have said; “but it isn’t easy
for one who is a stranger to find people in such a crowd.”

“I don’t know that,” said she, with a pretty little toss of her head;
“where there’s a will there’s a way. If I hadn’t found friends, I might
have been alone all day--and there are three or four of the shows I
have never seen, now.”

I began to look as sorry as I could, while I thought what to answer,
when the young man who was close to her tried to steal some of the
cake; she turned round quickly, and rapped his fingers with the back of
her knife, and he pretended to be hurt. She only laughed, and went on
cutting up the cake, but she called him Jack, and seemed so intimate
with him that it put me out, and I sat down on the other side of the
circle, some way off.

“It’s all right,” said the Parson, looking up from the fire; “boils
splendidly--give me the tea.”

Miss Lucy handed him a little parcel of tea from her bag, and he put it
into the kettle.

“I declare we have forgotten the milk,” said she; “do run and fetch it,
Jack--it’s in a bottle under the back seat of the four-wheel.”

I jumped up before Jack, who hardly moved, and ran off to fetch the
milk; for which she gave me a pleasant smile when I came back, and I
felt better pleased, and enjoyed the tea and cake and bread and butter,
and all the talk over it, very much; except that I couldn’t stand this
Jack, who was forcing her to notice him every minute, by stealing her
teaspoon or her cake, or making some of his foolish remarks.

The sun set splendidly before we had finished, and it began to get a
little chilly.

“Well,” said Joe, jumping up, “I’m off to get the horse put to. You’d
better be starting, Lu; you won’t be down hill much before dark, now,
and there’s no moon--worse luck.”

“Very well,” said she, taking up her bonnet, and putting it on; “we
shall be ready in five minutes.”

“You’ll go behind with them, I suppose,” said Joe to me.

“I’m to have a seat, mind,” struck in that odious Jack; “Lucy promised
me that an hour ago.” I could have given him a good kick; however, I
don’t think I showed that I was put out.

“How can you tell such fibs, Jack?” said she; but I didn’t take any
notice of that.

“Thank you, I wish to stay on the hill,” said I. “Besides, the
four-wheel will be full without me.”

She didn’t seem to hear; and began talking to one of the other girls.

“But how are you to get down?” said Joe.

“Oh, I can walk,” said I, “or ride behind you.”

“Very good, if you like,” said he; “the chestnut would carry six, if
her back was long enough;” and away he went to get the four-wheel ready.

We followed; Miss Lucy sticking close to her friend, and never saying
a word to any of us. I walked with Mr. Warton, who was in the highest
spirits, looking over his shoulder, and raving about the green tints in
the sunset.

When we got to the carriages, there was kissing and shaking of hands,
and the rest went off, while the parson and Miss Lucy packed into the
front seat, and Jack and Jem the carter-boy into the hind seat of the
four-wheel; and away they drove, wishing us “good night.” I watched
them for some time, and could see Jack leaning forward close to her
ear; and turned back with Joe into the Castle, more out of sorts than I
had been since I left London.

Joe hurried off to the police tent, where the Committee were giving
away the prizes, saying I should find him there when I wanted him;
and I loitered away to see whatever was to be seen. At first nothing
seemed to please me. I watched the men and boys playing at three
sticks a penny, and thought I might as well have been on Primrose
Hill. Then I went and looked at the shows; and there was the fellow in
flesh-coloured tights, turning over and over on the slack rope, and
the clarionet and French horn and drum, played by the three men in
corduroys, all out of tune and louder than ever, as if they had only
just begun, instead of having been screaming and rumbling away all day;
and the man outside the pink-eyed lady’s caravan was shouting away for
the hundredth time all about her, and then playing the pan-pipes, as if
no other woman in the world had pink eyes.

I was determined they shouldn’t have any of my money at any rate, so
I strolled further down the line, and looked into a low booth where a
fiddle was going. Here several couples were dancing, with their arms
a-kimbo, on some planks which had been put down on the grass, and all
the rest of the booth was crowded with others looking on. This pleased
me better, for the dancers seemed to enjoy themselves wonderfully,
and made a sort of clattering accompaniment to the music with their
hob-nailed shoes, which was merry and pleasant.

When I was tired of watching them, I thought I would go and find Joe;
so I went over to the tent, and there I got all right, and began to
enjoy myself again.

In the further corner of the tent, the Squire and another justice were
sitting, and hearing a charge of pocket-picking, of which there were
only two during the whole day, the police told me. Opposite the door,
the rest of the Committee were sitting at a table and giving away the
prizes.

Joe beckoned me in, and I went round to the back of the table and
looked on. As the men came up from the group round the door, when their
names were called out, the umpires said a few words to each of them,
and then gave them their prizes, and most of them made some sort of
speech in answer; for they were much less shy than in the morning, I
suppose from the sense of having earned their right to hold up their
heads by winning. The owner of the successful donkey was just carrying
out the flitch of bacon when I arrived; after him the Somersetshire
backsword players were called in to take the first three prizes for
that sport, they having beaten all the Wiltshire men; while old
Seeley, the only Berkshire man entered, to everybody’s surprise had
not played out his tie, but had given his head (as they said) to his
second opponent. Therefore, although entitled to the last prize for
having won his first bout, he had not done all his duty in the eyes of
the umpires, who gently complained, while handing him over his four
half-crowns, and wondered that so gallant an old gamester, and a Yale
man, should not have played out his ties for the honour of the county.

“Well, gen’l’men,” said old Seeley, giving a hitch with his shoulders,
“I’ll just tell you how it was. You see, ther wur six Somersetshire
old gamesters come up to play, and ther wur six of our side to play
’em; dree Wiltshire and dree Barkshire, if so be as we could have
made a party. But the dree from Wiltshire they wouldn’t go in along
wi’ we, and turned their backs on me and my two mates; so my two
mates wouldn’t go in at all, and wanted me to give out too. But you
see, gen’l’men, I’d a spent a matter of a pound over getting myself
a little better food, and making myself lissom; so thinks I, I must
go up and have a bout, let it be how t’wool. And you saw, gen’l’men,
as I played a good stick. When it cum’ to playing off the ties, there
wur dree Somersetshire tiers, and two of our side, that’s Slade and
me. But when a man turns his back on me, gen’l’men, why I turns my
back on him; so I guv my head to young Mapstone, and left Slade to
win if he could. Though I thinks, if thay Wiltshire chaps had behaved
theirselves as thay should, we might ha’ had the prize, for I knows as
I never played freer in my life. And I hopes, gen’l’men, as you don’t
think I wur afeard of any man as ever got on that stage. Bless you!”
said old Seeley, warming up, “I be that fond o’ thay sticks, I assure
you, gen’l’men, I’d as lief meet a man as is a man for a bout wi’ thay
sticks, as I would--a joint of roast beef.”

Old Seeley’s speech carried conviction, for there could be no mistake
about the tone in which he drew his last comparison, after a moment’s
pause to think of the thing he liked best, and he retired from the tent
in high favour, as I think he deserved to be.

After watching these doings for some time, I began to feel very hungry,
for I had eaten hardly any thing at tea, so I told Joe that he would
find me over in the great booth getting some supper, and went out.
It was getting quite dark, and the stage and poles looked black and
melancholy as I passed by them. But the publicans’ booths were all
lighted up inside, and looked very cheerful, and were full of holiday
folk, fortifying themselves with all sorts of meat and drink before
starting for the descent of the hill, and the walk home in the dark.

I pushed my way through the crowd round the door, and reached the
bar, where the landlord recognized me directly, and handed me over to
Peter, who soon landed me at the table in the recess, which was still
well supplied with cold joints and bread and cheese. While he went off
to get my plate and ale, I had time to look round. The booth was much
gayer than the day before; every post was decked more or less with
flowers and evergreens, and the flags had been brought inside. The
whole place was lighted with dips and flickering oil lamps, which gave
light enough to let one see all parts of the tent pretty clearly.

There were a good many tables ranged about; the one nearest to
ours wasn’t yet occupied, but at all the others were groups of men
drinking beer, and some smoking, and talking eagerly over the events
of the day. Those nearest the high table seemed under some little
restraint, and spoke low; but from the farther tables rose a loud hum
of the broadest Berkshire, and an occasional scrap of a song. A few
women were scattered here and there--mostly middle-aged, hard-working
housewives--watching their good men, and anxious to carry them off in
good time, and before too much of the harvest-savings had found its way
to the landlord’s till. About the entrance was a continually-changing
crowd, and the atmosphere of the whole was somewhat close, and redolent
of not very fragrant tobacco.

At the supper-table where I was, were seven or eight men. The one just
opposite me was a strong-built, middle-aged man, in a pepper-and-salt
riding-coat and waistcoat, with an open, weather-beaten face, and keen,
deep-set, gray eyes, who seemed bent on making a good supper. Next
above him were the two Oxford scholars, but they didn’t take the least
notice of me, which I thought they might have done, after our morning’s
ride together. They had finished supper, and were smoking cigars, and
chatting with one another, and with the pepper-and-salt man, whom they
called Doctor. But my observations were soon cut short by Peter, who
came back with my plate and knife and fork, and a foaming pewter of
ale, and I set to work as heartily as the Doctor himself.

“You’ll find some of this lettuce and watercress eat well with your
beef, Sir,” said he, pushing across a dish.

“Thank you, Sir,” said I; “I find that watching the games makes one
very hungry.”

“The air, Sir, all the downs air,” said the Doctor; “I call them Doctor
Downs. Do more for the appetite in six hours than I can in a week.
Here, Peter, get this gentleman some of your mistress’s walnut pickles.”

And then the good-natured Doctor fell to upon his beef again, and
chatted away with the scholars and me, and soon made me feel myself
quite at home. I own that I had done my neighbours a little injustice;
for they were pleasant enough when the ice was once broken, and I
daresay didn’t mean to be rude after all.

As soon as I had finished my supper, the shorter of the scholars handed
me a large cigar, the first whiff of which gave me a high idea of
the taste of my contemporaries of the upper classes in the matter of
tobacco.

Just then the verse of a song, in which two or three men were joining,
rose from the other end of the tent, from amidst the hum of voices.

“I wish those fellows would sing out,” said the short scholar; “I can’t
make out more than a word or two.”

“You wouldn’t be any the wiser if you could,” said the other; “we
have ceased to be a singing nation. The people have lost the good old
ballads, and have got nothing in their place.”

“How do you know?” said the short scholar; “I should like to hear for
myself, at any rate.”

“What sort of ballads do you mean, Sir?” said I to the long scholar.

“Why, those in the Robin Hood Garland, for instance,” said he. “Songs
written for the people, about their heroes, and, I believe, by the
people. There’s nothing of the sort now.”

“What do you say to ‘There’s a Good Time Coming’?” asked the short
scholar.

“Well, it’s the best of them, I believe,” said the other; “but you know
it was written by Mackay, an LL.D. Besides, it’s essentially a town
song.”

“It’s a tip-top one, at any rate,” said the short scholar; “I wish I
could write such another.”

“What I say, is, that the popular songs now are written by
_litterateurs_ in London, Is there any life or go in ‘Woodman spare
that Tree,’ or ‘The Old Arm-Chair’? and they are better than the
slip-slop sentimental stuff most in vogue.”

“What a discontented old bird you are!” said the short scholar; “you’re
never pleased with any product of this enlightened century.”

“Let the century get a character, then; when it does, we shall get some
good staves. I’m not particular; a brave story, or a quaint story, or a
funny story, in good rough verse, that’s all I ask for. But, where to
find one? Here’s the Doctor for umpire. I say, Doctor, don’t you agree
with me, now?”

“Not quite,” said the Doctor, looking up from his cold beef. “I dare
say you wouldn’t think them worth much; but there are plenty of ballads
sung about which you never hear.”

“What! real modern ballads, written by some of the masses, in this
century, for instance? Where did you ever hear one, Doctor? What are
they like, now?”

“Well, my work takes me a good deal about in queer places, and at
queer times, amongst the country folk, and I hear plenty of them. Will
one about Lord Nelson suit you? There’s an old patient of mine at the
next table who owns a little coal wharf on the canal; he fell into the
lock one night, broke his arm, and was nearly drowned, and I attended
him. He takes a trip in the barges now and then, which makes him fancy
himself half a sailor. I dare say I can set him off, if he hasn’t had
too much beer.”

So the Doctor walked over to a lower table, and spoke to a
grisly-headed old man in a velveteen coat and waistcoat, and a blue
birdseye-neckerchief, who seemed pleased, and drew his sleeve across
his mouth, and cleared his throat. Then there was a rapping on the
table, and the old bargee began in a rumbling bass voice:--

THE DEATH OF LORD NELSON.

    Come all you gallant seamen as unites a meeting,
      Attend to these lines I be going to relate,
    And when you have heard them ’twill move you with pity
      To think how Lord Nelson he met with his fate.
    For he was a bold and undaunted commander
      As ever did sail on the ocean so wide;
    He made both the French and the Spaniard surrender
      By always a-pouring into them a broadside.

    One hundred engagements ’twas he had been into,
      And ne’er in his life was he known to be beat,
    Though he’d lost an arm, likewise a right eye, boys,
      No power upon earth ever could him defeat.
    His age at his death it was forty and seven;
      And as long as I breathe, his great praises I’ll sing;
    The whole navigation was given up to him,
      Because he was loyal and true to his king.

    Then up steps the doctor in a very great hurry,
      And unto Lord Nelson these words did he say:
    “Indeed, then, my Lord, it is I’m very sorry,
      To see you here lying and bleeding this way.”
    “No matter, no matter whatever about me,
      My time it is come, I’m almost at the worst;
    But here’s my gallant seamen a-fighting so boldly,
      Discharge off your duty to all of them first.”

    Then with a loud voice he calls out to his captain,
      “Pray let me, sir, hear how the battle does go,
    For I think our great guns do continue to rattle,
      Though death is approaching I firmly do know.”
    “The antagonist’s ship has gone down to the bottom,
      Eighteen we have captive and brought them on board,
    Four more we have blown quite out of the ocean,
      And that is the news I have brought you, my Lord.”

    Come all you gallant seamen as unites a meeting,
      Always let Lord Nelson’s memory go round,
    For it is your duty, when you unites a meeting,
      Because he was loyal and true to the crownd.
    And now to conclude and finish these verses,
      “My time it is come; kiss me, Hardy,” he cried.
    Now thousands go with you, and ten thousand blessings
      For gallant Lord Nelson in battle who died.

          Mourn, England, mourn, mourn and complain,
          For the loss of Lord Nelson, who died on the main.

The short scholar was in raptures; he shouted in the chorus; he banged
the table till he upset and broke his tumbler, which the vigilant
landlady from behind the casks duly noted, and scored up to him.

I worked away at my note-book, and managed to get all the song, except
one verse between the second and third, which I couldn’t catch.

“Bravo, Doctor! Here, waiter, get me another tumbler, and some more
gin-punch. What a stunning call. Couldn’t the old bird give us another
bit of history? It’s as good as reading ‘Southey’s Life,’ and much
funnier,” rattled away the short scholar.

“What a quaint old grisly party it is!” said the long scholar; “I shall
stand him a pot of beer.”

“Well, he won’t object to that,” said the Doctor, working away at the
beef and pickles.

“Here, waiter, take a pot of beer, with my compliments, over to that
gentleman,” said the long scholar, pointing to the old bargeman, “and
say how much obliged we are to him for his song.”

So Peter trotted across with the liquor, and the old man telegraphed
his acknowledgments.

“By the way, Doctor,” said the short scholar, “as you seem to know a
good deal about these things, can you tell me what ‘Vicar of Bray’
means? I saw two men quarrelling just after the games, and it was all
their wives could do to keep them from fighting, and I heard it was
because one had called the other ‘Vicar of Bray.’”

“It means ‘turn-coat’ in Berkshire,” answered the Doctor. “I didn’t
think they used the name now; but I remember the time when it was the
common term of reproach. I dare say you know Bray, gentlemen?”

“I should think so,” said the short scholar; “pretty village just below
Maidenhead. I pulled by it on my way to town last June.”

“Yes, and it’s hard on such a pretty village to have had such a bad
parson,” said the Doctor.

“I say, Doctor, give us the ‘Vicar of Bray,’ now, it will set off some
of the singing birds at the other end of the booth; I can see they’re
getting into prime piping order.”

“Very good, if you like it,” said the Doctor, pushing away his plate,
and taking a finishing pull at his pewter, “only the song is in print,
I know, somewhere; so you mustn’t think you’ve found much of a prize,
Sir,” added he to me, for my use of pencil and note-book hadn’t escaped
him.

“No, Sir,” said I; “but I should like to hear it, of all things.”

So the Doctor, without further preface, began in his jolly clear voice--

THE VICAR OF BRAY.

    In good King Charles’s golden days,
      When loyalty had no harm in’t,
    A zealous High-Church man I was,
      And so I gained preferment.
    To teach my flock I never missed:
      Kings were by God appointed;
    And they are damned who dare resist,
      Or touch the Lord’s anointed.
          _Chorus._--And this is law, I will maintain
                       Until my dying day, sir,
                     That whatsoever king shall reign,
                       I’ll be the Vicar of Bray, sir.

    When Royal James obtained the throne,
      And Popery grew in fashion,
    The Penal Laws I hooted down,
      And read the Declaration;
    The Church of Rome I found would fit
      Full well my constitution:
    And I had been a Jesuit;
      But for the Revolution.
                      And this is law, &c.

    When William, our deliverer, came
      To heal the nation’s grievance,
    Then I turned cat-in-pan again,
      And swore to him allegiance;
    Old principles I did revoke,
      Set conscience at a distance,
    Passive obedience was a joke,
      A jest was non-resistance.
                      And this is law, &c.

    When glorious Anne became our queen,
      The Church of England’s glory,
    Another face of things was seen,
      And I became a Tory.
    Occasional Conformist case!
      I damned such moderation;
    And thought the Church in danger was
      By such prevarication.
                      And this is law, &c.

    When George in pudding-time came o’er
      And moderate men looked big, sir,
    My principles I changed once more,
      And so became a Whig, sir.
    And thus preferment I procured
      From our Faith’s great Defender;
    And almost every day abjured
      The Pope and the Pretender.
                      For this is law, &c.

    The illustrious House of Hanover,
      And Protestant Succession,
    By these I lustily will swear
      While they can keep possession;
    For in my faith and loyalty
      I never once will falter,
    But George my king shall ever be,
      Except the times do alter.
                      For this is law, &c.

The short scholar was right as to the effect of the Doctor’s song. It
was hailed with rapturous applause by the lower tables, though you
would have said, to look at them, that scarcely a man of the audience,
except those close round the singer, could have appreciated it. People
don’t always like best what they fully understand; and I don’t know
which is the greatest mistake, to fancy yourself above your audience,
or to try to come down to them. The little stiffness which the presence
of strangers belonging to the broad-cloth classes had at first created
amongst the pastime folk was wearing off, and several songs were
started at once from the distant parts of the booth, all of which,
save one, came to untimely ends in the course of the first verse or so,
leaving the field clear to a ruddy-faced, smock-frocked man, who, with
his eyes cast up to the tent-top, droned through his nose the following
mournful ditty:--

THE BARKSHIRE TRAGEDY.

    A varmer he lived in the West Countree,
                          Hey-down, bow-down,
    A varmer he lived in the West Countree,
    And he had daughters one, two, and dree.
                          And I’ll be true to my love,
                          If my love’ll be true to me.

    As thay wur walking by the river’s brim,
                          Hey-down, bow-down,
    As thay wur walking by the river’s brim,
    The eldest pushed the youngest in.
                          And I’ll be true, &c.

    “Oh sister, oh sister, pray gee me thy hand,
                          Hey-down, &c.
    And I’ll gee thee both house and land.”
                          And I’ll, &c.

    “I’ll neither gee thee hand nor glove,
                          Hey-down, &c.
    Unless thou’lt gee me thine own true love.”
                          And I’ll, &c.

    So down she sank and away she swam,
                          Hey-down, &c.
    Until she came to the miller’s dam.
                          And I’ll, &c.

    The miller’s daughter stood by the door,
                          Hey-down, &c.
    As fair as any gilly-flow-èr.
                          And I’ll, &c.

    “Oh vather, oh vather, here swims a swan,
                          Hey-down, &c.
    Very much like a drownded gentlewomàn.”
                          And I’ll, &c.

    The miller he fot his pole and hook,
                          Hey-down, &c.
    And he fished the fair maid out of the brook.
                          And I’ll, &c.

    “Oh miller, I’ll gee thee guineas ten,
                          Hey-down, &c.
    If thou’lt fetch me back to my vather again.”
                          And I’ll, &c.

    The miller he took her guineas ten,
                          Hey-down, &c.
    And he pushed the fair maid in again.
                          And I’ll, &c.

    But the Crowner he cum, and the Justice too,
                          Hey-down, &c.
    With a hue and a cry and a hulla-balloo.
                          And I’ll, &c.

    They hanged the miller beside his own gate,
                          Hey-down, &c.
    For drowning the varmer’s daughter, Kate.
                          And I’ll, &c.

    The sister she fled beyond the seas,
                          Hey-down, &c.
    And died an old maid among black savageès.
                          And I’ll, &c.

    So I’ve ended my tale of the West Countree,
    And they calls it the Barkshire Trage-dèe.
                          And I’ll, &c.

“The Barkshire Tragedy, indeed! Now, Doctor, what have you to tell us
about this? When did it happen? Who was the lady? Was she drowned in
the Thames, the Kennet, or where?”

“Oh, I don’t know. All I can say is, she was drowned before my time;
for I remember hearing the song when I was a little chap in petticoats.
But the story seems a common one. There’s a north-country ballad
founded on it, I know, but I don’t remember the name just now.”

“‘The Bonny Mill-dams of Binnorie,’ is not it?” said the long scholar.

“Aye, that’s the name, I think.”

“Well, it’s very odd, for we’ve got the same story, all but the
miller, and his daughter as fair as any gilly-flower (why are millers’
daughters always pretty, by the way?), on the Welsh marshes,” said the
long scholar.

“Then, Sir, I must call on you to sing it. The call is with me at our
end of the booth,” said the Doctor. “And, Peter, bring me a little cold
gin-and-water, and a pipe. If I must breathe smoke-poison, I may as
well make it myself, at any rate.”

“Well, singing’s rather more than I bargained for. However, I suppose I
mustn’t spoil sport; so here goes.”

THE DROWNED LADY.

_Qy. another version of the Barkshire Tragedy?_

    Oh, it was not a pheasant cock,
        Nor yet a pheasant hen,
    But oh it was a lady fair
        Came swimming down the stream.

    An ancient harper passing by
        Found this poor lady’s body,
    To which his pains he did apply
        To make a sweet melòdy.

    To cat-gut dried he her inside,
        He drew out her back-bone,
    And made thereof a fiddle sweet
        All for to play upon.

    And all her hair so long and fair,
        That down her back did flow,
    Oh he did lay it up with care,
        To string his fiddle bow.

    And what did he with her fingers
        Which were so straight and small?
    Oh, he did cut them into pegs
        To screw up his fid-dòll.

    Then forth went he, as it might be,
        Upon a summer’s day,
    And met a goodly company,
        Who asked him in to play.

    Then from her bones he drew such tones
        As made their bones to ache,
    They sounded so like human groans,
        Their hearts began to quake.

    They ordered him in ale to swim,
        For sorrow’s mighty dry,
    And he to share their wassail fare
        Essayd right willingly.

    He laid his fiddle on a shelf
        In that old manor-hall,
    It played and sung all by itself,
        And thus sung this fid-dòll:--

    “There sits the squire, my worthy sire,
        A-drinking hisself drunk,
    And so did he, ah woe is me!
        The day my body sunk.

    “There sits my mother, half asleep,
        A-taking of her ease,
    Her mind is deep, if one might peep,
        In her preserves and keys.

    “There sits my sister, cruel Joan,
        Who last week drownded me;
    And there’s my love, with heart of stone,
        Sits making love to she.

    “There sits the Crowner, Uncle Joe,
        Which comforteth poor me;
    He’ll hold his Crowner’s quest, I know,
        To get his Crowner’s fee.”

    Now when this fiddle thus had spoke
        It fell upon the floor,
    And into little pieces broke,
        No word spoke never more.

“Thank you, Sir,” said the Doctor; “that’s a queer tune though. I don’t
know that I ever heard one at all like it. But I shouldn’t say all that
song was old now.”

“Well, I believe you’re right. But I can say, as you said of the
Barkshire Tragedy, it’s all older than my time, for I remember my
father singing it just as I’ve sung it to you as long as I can remember
any thing.”

“And what did he say of it?”

“Well, he said that five out of the first six verses were very old
indeed. He had heard them often when he was a child, and always the
same words. The rest was all patch-work, he said, by different hands,
and he hardly knew which were the old lines, and which new.”

“I say,” remarked the short scholar, “the Doctor don’t seem to be a bad
hand at making the smoke-poison.”

The Doctor blew out a long white cloud, and was about to reply, when
a brawny young carter, at a distant table, took his pipe from his
lips, and, in answer to the urgings of his neighbours, trolled out the
following little piece of sentiment:--

CUPID’S GARDEN.

    As I wur in Cu-bit’s gardin
      Not mwoar nor haf an hour,
    ’Twur ther I zeed two may-dens
      Zittin under Cu-bit’s bower,
    A-gatherin of sweet jassa-mine,
      The lilly and the rose.
    These be the fairest flowers
      As in the gardin grows.

    I vondly stepped to one o’ them,
      These words to her I zays,
    “Be you engaged to arra young man,
      Come tell to me, I prays.”
    “I beant engaged to narra young man,
      I solemnly declare;
    I aims to live a may-den,
      And still the lau-rel wear.”

    Zays I, “My stars and gar-ters!
      This here’s a pretty go,
    Vor a vine young mayd as never wos
      To sar’ all mankind zo.”
    But the t’other young may-den looked sly at me,
      And vrom her zeat she risn,
    Zays she, “Let thee and I go our own waay,
      And we’ll let she go shis’n.”

“Oh, I say, that beats all!” said the short scholar, with a shout of
laughter. “I must have the words somehow. Let’s see, how did he begin?
something about Cubit. What a rum notion to call Cupid, Cubit. What was
it, Doctor?”

“You shouldn’t laugh, really, Sir, at our west-country sentiment,”
said the Doctor, with astounding gravity. “I don’t think I can
conscientiously help you to the words, when I know you’ll only be
making fun of them at some wine-party. They are meant for malt
drinkers, not for wine drinkers.”

“Fudge, Doctor. Come, now, give us the words, or I shall have to go
over and ask the performer for them.”

“I think I can give you them,” said I, looking up from my note-book.

“What a thing it is to write shorthand!” said the Doctor, glancing at
my hieroglyphics; “we don’t learn that sort of thing down in these
parts.”

“I wonder we haven’t had more sentimental songs,” said the long
scholar; “I suppose there are plenty of love-stories going about?”

“Oh yes, plenty,” said the Doctor; “mostly ballads telling how rich
young heiresses disdained all good matches, for the sake of a sailor
boy with tarry trousers, or a seductive fogger, thereby provoking their
cruel match-making parents. For instance:--

    “Says the daughter to the mother, “Your art is all in vain,
    For Dukes and Lords and Earls alike their riches I disdain;
    I’d rather live a humble life, and my time I would employ
    Increasing nature’s prospects, with my bonny labouring boy.””

“What on earth can ‘increasing nature’s prospects’ mean?” asked the
long scholar.

“How can I tell?” said the Doctor, laughing; “I don’t pretend to
construe; I only give you the words. But you must allow the moral to be
good. It runs:--

    “Success to every labouring boy that ploughs and hoes the ground,
    For when his work is over, his home he will enjoy;
    So happy is the girl that gets a bonny labouring boy.”

“Let’s see,” said the short scholar, “we’ve had specimens of patriotic,
legendary, and sentimental ditties; but how about drinking songs? All
tuneful nations, since the world began, have sung the praises of good
liquor.”

“I don’t know that we have many drinking songs,” said the Doctor; “I
suppose it takes wine, or spirits at any rate, to make a man write such
stuff as ‘the glasses sparkle,’ or ‘a bumper of Burgundy.’ The bucolic
muse only gets smallish beer. But we must see what we can do for
you.” So the Doctor beckoned to Peter, and sent him off to the lower
tables with a pot of beer, the speedy result of which mission was the
following song:--

TOVEY’S TAP.--AIR, “_Derry down_.”

    Owld Tovey once brewed a barrel o’ beer,
    For he wur a man as lovèd good cheer,
    And zays he, “I’ll jest ax a veaw o’ my vriends
    To come and try how the likker spends.”[36]
                                        Derry down, &c.

    There’s long Tom Ockle, he shall be one,
    And little Jack Smith, who’s as round as a tun,
    And owld Gaarge Mabbutt, who’s allus a-dry,
    I’ll warn’d thay’ll make good company.
                                        Derry down, &c.

    The barrell wur tapped, and the beer runned well,
    How much they vour drenked I never heard tell;
    But zome how or other they one and all
    Did zwear as how the drenk wur small.
                                        Derry down, &c.

    Owld Tovey at this did look main scrow;[37]
    Zays he, “My vriends, I’d hev’ee to kneow
    That my beer has made ’ee as drunk as pegs,
    And not one o’ you dree can kip on his legs.”
                                        Derry down, &c.

    They left the house, and the path they tuk,
    Athert the meadow as leads to the bruk;
    And you plainly med zee as every man
    Had a pair o’ crooked stockings an.
                                        Derry down, &c.

    Zays Mabbott to Ockle, “Owld Tovey wur zurly;”
    Zays Ockle to Mabbott, “I’m uncommon purly;[38]
    Be mindful, I zay, vor yer missuses’ zakes,
    Which o’ them two narrer bridges you takes.”
                                        Derry down, &c.

    “The bruk is main deep,” Gaarge Mabbott then zaid,
    As he looked at the water, and scratted his yead;
    “And I owns I should ’mazinly like for to know
    Auver which o’ thay bridges you aims vor to go.”
                                        Derry down, &c.

    “’Tis a akkerdish place to crass in the night,
    And to stand here till marnin’ wouldn’t be right;
    ’T’ain’t a mossell o’ use to bide stabbleing[39] here,
    Zo let’s go back and vinish the barrel o’ beer.”
                                        Derry down, &c.

“A good cast, Doctor;” said the long scholar; “but you’ve raised the
wrong fish. That isn’t what my friend here meant by a drinking song.
He expects a bucolic rendering of one of Moore’s songs, and you serve
him out a queer pot-house tale. Is there no enthusiasm for good drink
amongst you?”

“I wish there were less,” said the Doctor, with a sigh; “at any rate,
less consumption of bad drink. Tippling is our great curse, as it is
that of all England; but there’s less of it than there used to be.
But for a drinking song such as you mean, I’m at fault. The nearest
approach to it that I know of is a song of which I only remember two
lines. They run--

    “Sartinly the sixpenny’s the very best I’ve see’d yet,
    I do not like the fourpenny, nor yet the intermediate.

“But even here you see, though the poet was meditating on drink, it was
in a practical rather than an enthusiastic spirit.”

Just then, a stout old yeoman entered the booth, dressed in a broad
straight-cut brown coat with metal buttons, drab breeches, and mahogany
tops; and, marching up to the bar, ordered a glass of brandy and water;
while his drink was being prepared, he stood with his back to our
table, talking to the landlord.

“We’re in luck,” said the Doctor in a low voice, pointing to the
new-comer with the end of his pipe; “if he stays, we shall have the
best old song in all the west country, sung as it should be.”

“Who is he?” asked the short scholar.

“An old Gloucestershire farmer from Sutherup way, famous for his breed
of sheep. He must be near seventy, and has twelve miles to ride home
to-night, and won’t think so much of it as you or I would.”

“He looks a tough old blade.”

“You may say that. But he isn’t the man he was, for he has lived pretty
hard. He used to be a famous wrestler; and one day, many years ago, an
Ilsley dealer came down to buy his flock of two-year olds. They drank
six bottles of port over the deal, and got it all straight out except
the odd sheep, but they couldn’t make out, cipher it how they would,
who the odd sheep belonged to; so they agreed to wrestle for the odd
sheep in the farmer’s kitchen, and somehow both of them got hurt, and
the old boy has never gone quite right since.”

“What an old sponge! six bottles of port between two of them! no wonder
they couldn’t do their sum.”

“Ah, we mustn’t judge of the men of his time by our rules,” said the
Doctor; “it was part of a yeoman’s creed in those days to send his
friends off drunk, and to be carried to bed himself by his fogger and
carter, or else to sleep under his kitchen-table. They lived hard
enough, and misused a deal of good liquor meant to strengthen man’s
heart, following the example of their betters; but they had their good
points. That old man, now, is the best master in all his neighbourhood;
and he and the parson keep up the wages in the winter, and never let a
man go to the house who will work.”

The old farmer turned round, glass in hand, and came and sat down
at the table. “Your sarvant, gen’l’men,” said be, taking off his
broad-brimmed beaver. “Why, Doctor,” he went on, recognizing our
friend, and holding out his great bony hand, “be main glad to zee ’ee.”

“Thank you, farmer,” said the Doctor, returning the grip; “we haven’t
met this long while; I’m glad to see you wearing so well.”

“Yes, I be pretty-feteish, thank God,” said the farmer. “Your health,
sir, and gen’l’men.”

After a little judicious talk on the day’s sport, the Doctor suddenly
began, “Now, farmer, you must do us a favour, and give us your famous
old Gloucestershire song. I’ve been telling all our friends here about
it, and they’re keen to hear it.”

“’Spose you means Gaarge Ridler?” said the farmer.

“Of course,” said the Doctor.

“Well, I don’t know as I’ve zung these score o’ months,” said the
farmer, “but hows’mever, if you wants it, here goes.” So the farmer
finished his brandy and water, cleared his throat, balanced himself on
the hind legs of his chair, cast up his eyes and began--

    Thaay stwuns, thaay stwuns, thaay stwuns, thaay stwuns,
    Thaay stwuns, thaay stwuns, thaay stwuns, thaay stwuns.

“What’s he saying--what language?” whispered the tall scholar.

“Mad old party,” murmured the short scholar.

“Hush,” whispered the Doctor; “that’s the orthodox way to begin; don’t
put him out.”

I couldn’t tell what in the world to write, but the farmer went on with
growing emphasis--

    Thaay stwuns, thaay stwuns, thaay stwuns, thaay stwuns,
    Thaay stwuns, thaay stwuns, _thaay stwuns_, THAAY S, T, W, U, N, S.

There was a moment’s pause, during which the Doctor had much difficulty
in keeping order; then the farmer got fairly under weigh, and went on--

    Thaay stwuns that built Gaarge Ridler’s oven
        Oh, thaay cum vrom the Blakeney Quaar,
    And Gaarge he wur a jolly owld man,
        And his yead did graw above his yare.

    One thing in Gaarge Ridler I must commend,
        And I hold it vor a notable thing:
    He made his braags avoore he died,
        As wi’ any dree brothers his zons zhou’d zing.

    Ther’ wur Dick the treble, and Jack the mean,
        Let every mon zing in his auwn pleace,
    And Gaarge he wur the elder brother,
        And there-voore he would zing the base.

    Droo’ aal the world, owld Gaarge would bwoast,
        Commend me to merry owld England mwoast,
    While vools gwoes scamblin’ vur and nigh,
        We bides at whoam, my dog and I.

    Ov their furrin tongues let travellers brag,
        Wi’ their vifteen neames vor a puddin’ bag,
    Two tongues I knows ne’er towld a lie,
        And their wearers be my dog and I.

    My dog has got his maaster’s nose,
        To smell a knave droo silken hose;
    But when good company I spy,
        “Welcome,” quoth my dog and I.

    When I hev dree sixpences under my thumb,
        Oh then I be welcome wherever I cum;
    But when I hev none, O then I pass by;
        ’Tis poverty pearts good company.

    When I gwoes dead, as it may hap,
        My grave shall be under the good yeal-tap,
    Wi’ vaulded earmes ther’ wool I lie,
        Cheek by jowl my dog and I.

Just as the farmer was finishing the song, Master George, with Joe and
one or two more behind him, came in. He took up the last verse, and
rolled it out as he came up towards our table, and a lot of the rest
joined in with him; even the over-worked Peter, I could see stopping
for a moment to shout that he would be buried under the tap; I dare say
he meant it, only I think he would like it to be always running.

Master George knew most of the people, and made us all merrier even
than we were before; and in the next half-hour or so, for which time we
stayed in the booth, I should think there must have been a dozen more
songs sung. However, I shall only give the one which seemed to be the
greatest favourite, for I find that this chapter is running very long.
This song was sung by a queer little man, with a twisted face, and a
lurcher dog between his knees, who I believe was an earth stopper. He
called it

BUTTERMILK JACK.

    Ther wur an owld ’oman as had but one son,
    And thay lived together as you med zee;
    And they’d nought but an owld hen as wanted to sett,
    Yet somehow a landlord he fain would be.

    “Oh, I’ve been and begged me some buttermilk, mother,
    Off of an owld ’oman as has girt store;
    And I shall well rewarded be,
    Vor she’s g’in me haf a gallon or mwore.

    “Oh mother, my buttermilk I will sell,
    And all for a penny as you med zee;
    And with my penny then I will buy eggs,
    Vor I shall have seven for my pennèy.

    “Oh mother, I’ll set them all under our hen,
    And seven cock chickens might chance for to be;
    But seven cock chickens or seven cap hens,
    There’ll be seven half-crownds for me.

    “Oh, I’ll go carry them to market, mother,
    And nothing but vine volk shall I zee;
    And with my money then I will buy land,
    Zo as a landlord I med be.”

    “Oh my dear zon, wilt thee know me,
    When thee hast gotten great store of wealth?”
    “Oh, my dear mother, how shall I know thee,
    When I shall hardly know my own self?”

    With that the owld ’oman she flew in a passion,
    And dashed her son Jack up agin the wall,
    And his head caught the shelf where the buttermilk stood,
    So down came the buttermilk, pitcher and all.

    Zo aal you as has got an old hen for to sett,
    Both by night and by day mind you has her well watched,
    Lest you should be like unto Buttermilk Jack,
    To reckon your chickens before thay are hatched.

“Well, I must be moving,” said the Doctor at last, looking at his
watch; “how do you get home, Mr. Hurst?”

“Bless us! near nine o’clock,” said Joe, following the Doctor’s
example; “oh, I ride myself, and my friend here talks of going behind.”

“Better not ride double, the night’s dark,” said the Doctor, hoisting
on his overcoat with Peter’s help. “If he likes to take his luck in my
gig, I can put him down at your gate. What do you say, Sir?”

I thankfully accepted; for I didn’t at all like the notion of riding
behind Joe on the chestnut, and I can’t think how I could ever have
been such a fool as to say I would do it. The Doctor had two bright
lamps to his gig, which gave us glimpses of the closed booths and
camping places of the people who were going to stay on the hill all
night, as we drove out of the Castle. I suggested that it must be very
bad for the people sleeping out up there.

“For their health?” said he, “not a bit of it, on a fine night like
this--do ’em good; I wish they always slept so healthily.”

“I didn’t quite mean that, Sir!”

“Oh, for their morals? Well, I don’t know that there’s much harm done.
I’m sorry to say they’re used to crowding--and, after all, very few but
the owners of the booths, and the regular tramps, stay up here. Didn’t
you see how quiet every thing was?”

I said I had noticed this; and then he began asking me about the
sports, for he had only got on to the hill late in the afternoon; and
when we came to the wrestling and backsword play, I asked him whether
he thought they did any harm.

“No,” said he, “there are very few serious accidents--in fact none--now
that drink is not allowed on the stage. There used to be some very
brutal play in out-of-the-way places, where the revels were got up
by publicans. But that is all over, at least about this part of the
country.”

“Then you wouldn’t stop them, Sir?”

“Stop them! not I--I would encourage them, and make the parish clerk
and constable perpetual umpires.” And then he went on to say how
he should like to see the young fellows in every parish drilled in
a company, and taught all sorts of manly exercises, and shooting
especially; so that they would make good light troops at a day’s
notice, in case of invasion. But he was afraid the great game
preservers would never allow this. And in the middle of his talk,
which seemed very sensible, we came to Joe’s gate, and I got down, and
wished him good night.

I found the family gone to bed, and only Joe and the Parson in the
kitchen, and there, over a last pipe, we chatted about the sports.

At last the Parson turned to me, and said, “You saw a good deal of the
play on the stage; now, would you stop it if you could?”

I thought a minute over what I had seen, and what the Doctor had said.

“No, Sir,” said I, “I can’t say that I would.”

“That’s candid,” said he. “And now I’ll make an admission. There’s
a good deal of the play that wants very close watching. The umpires
should be resolute, quick men, and stand no nonsense. I saw one or two
bouts to-day that should have been stopped.”

“You see,” said Joe, taking his pipe out of his mouth, “there allus
must be.”

“We don’t admit your evidence, Joseph,” interrupted the Parson, “you
are a prejudiced witness.”

“But you haven’t changed your mind, Sir,” said I.

“No,” said he, “I should be sorry to hear that these sports had died
out, but I should like to hear that people took an interest in them who
could manage the men thoroughly.”

“The Doctor,” said I, “as we drove home, said he would have the parish
clerk and constable for perpetual umpires.”

“They wouldn’t be so good as the parson or the squire,” said he; “if
I were rector of one of the parishes where they are still kept up, I
would give prizes for them, but I would always be umpire myself.”

“I wish to goodness you was then,” said Joe, as we lighted our candles.

“You remember, Sir,” said I, “that you promised to write a sermon about
the pastime.”

“What! _after_ the fair?” said he.

“’Twill do just as well,” said Joe, “I should mortally like to hear it.”

“Well, it might keep you awake perhaps. He has an hereditary weakness
for slumber in church, you must know,” said the Parson, turning to me;
“when we wanted to alter the sittings in the church six or seven years
ago, his father stood out for his old high box so sturdily, that I
took some pains to argue with him, and to find out what it was which
made it so dear to him. I found out at last that it was a snug corner,
which just fitted his shoulders, where nobody could see him, and where,
as soon as the text was given out, in his own words, “I just watches
my missus wipe her spectacles, and fix herself to listen, and then I
vaulds my arms and thenks o’ nothin’.”

I looked at Joe to see how he would take it, but he only chuckled, and
said, “Well, ’tis the parson’s business to keep us awake. But a sermon
on our sports, just showing folk about the rights on it, is just what I
should amazingly like to have by me.”

The Parson looked at Joe for a moment very curiously, and then said,
“Very well, I will write you one. Good night.”

And so we went off to bed.

[36] “Spend”--to consume.

[37] “Scrow”--angry.

[38] “Purly”--purblind.

[39] “Stabble”--to tread dirt about.




CHAPTER VIII.


Miss Lucy couldn’t be spared to go up to the hill on the second day
of the pastime, for there was some great operation going on in the
cheese room, which she had to overlook. So Mr. Warton drove me up in
the four-wheel. I was very anxious to find out, if I could, whether
there was any thing more between him and Miss Lucy than friendship,
but it wasn’t at all an easy matter. First I began speaking of the
young gentleman who had taken my place in the four-wheel; for I thought
that would be a touchstone, and that if he were like me he would be
glad to get a chance of abusing this Jack. But he only called him a
forward boy, and said he was a cousin of the Hursts, who lived in
the next parish. Then I spoke of Miss Lucy herself, and he was quite
ready to talk about her as much as I liked, and seemed never tired
of praising her. She was a thoroughly good specimen of an English
yeoman’s daughter; perfectly natural, and therefore perfectly well
bred; not above making good puddings and preserves, and proud of the
name her brother’s cheeses had won in the market, yet not negligent of
other matters, such as the schools, and her garden; never going into
follies of dress in imitation of weak women who ought to set better
examples, yet having a proper appreciation of her own good looks, and
a thorough knowledge of the colours and shapes which suited her best;
not particularly clever or well read, but with an open mind and a sound
judgment--and so he went on; and the longer he went on the more I was
puzzled, and my belief is, that on this subject the Parson got much
more out of me than I out of him, on that morning’s drive.

We had a very pleasant day on the hill, but as the sports were all
the same as those of the day before (with the exception of jumping in
sacks, which was substituted for climbing the pole, and was very good
fun), I shall not give any further account of them; especially as the
gentlemen who are going to publish my story seem to think already that
I am rather too long-winded.

We got down home in capital time for tea, and Joe followed very soon
afterwards, in the highest spirits; for, as he said, every thing had
gone off so well, and everybody was pleased and satisfied; so we were
all very merry, and had another charming evening. I couldn’t tell what
had come to me when I got up stairs alone by myself, for I seemed as if
a new life were growing up in me, and I were getting all of a sudden
into a much bigger world, full of all sorts of work and pleasure, which
I had never dreamt of, and of people whom I could get to love and
honour, though I might never see or speak to them.

I had been bred up from a child never to look beyond my own narrow
sphere. To get on in it was the purpose of my life, and I had drilled
myself into despising every thing which did not, as I thought, help
towards this end. Near relations I had none. I was really fond of my
two friends, but I don’t think I should ever have got to be friends
with them if we hadn’t been in the same office; and I used often to
be half provoked with them, and to think myself a very wise fellow,
because out of office-hours they would read poetry and novels instead
of fagging at shorthand or accounts, as I did, and spent all their
salaries instead of saving. Except those two, I knew nobody; and
though I belonged to a debating society, it wasn’t that I cared for
the members, or what they talked about, but that I thought it might be
useful to me to talk fluently if I got on in business. Sometimes, and
especially in my yearly holidays, I had felt as if I wanted something
else, and that my way of life was after all rather a one-eyed sort of
business; but I set all such misgivings down as delusions, and had
never allowed them long to trouble me. In short I begin to suspect that
I must have been getting to be a very narrow, bigoted, disagreeable
sort of fellow, and it was high time that I should find my way to
Elm Close, or some such place, to have my eyes opened a little, and
discover that a man may work just as steadily and honestly--aye, much
more steadily and honestly--at his own business, without shutting up
his brains and his heart against every thing else that is going on in
the world around him. However, I can’t be too thankful that my teaching
came to me in the way it did, for I might have had to learn my lesson
in a very different school from Elm Close Farm.

There certainly never was such a pleasant school. For the next two or
three days after ‘the Scouring,’ Mr. Warton was my chief companion. Joe
and Miss Lucy both had their work to attend to after breakfast, and so
the Parson and I were left a good deal together; and we used to start
off to see some of the old men whom he had promised to show me, who
could tell me about the old pastimes. I never liked any thing so much
as these walks--not even the walks I afterwards used to have alone with
Miss Lucy, for they were too exciting, and half the time I was in such
a fret that I couldn’t thoroughly enjoy them. But there was no drawback
in these walks with the Parson. He was full of fun, and of all sorts of
knowledge; and he liked talking, and I think rather took a fancy to me,
and was pleased to see how I worked at collecting all the information I
could about the White Horse, for he took a great deal of pains to help
me.

One morning though I remember he got me into a regular puzzle
about King Alfred, for I had been reading over my notes of the old
gentleman’s story, and couldn’t make it agree with the tales which I
had read about Alfred’s hiding away in the cowherd’s hut, and burning
the cakes. So I asked Mr. Warton about it.

“I think,” said he, “you will find that Alfred was in the cowherd’s
cottage in the year 878, after the battle at Chippenham.”

“But, Sir,” said I, “according to the old gentleman’s story, Ashdown
was Alfred’s greatest victory; and Ashdown was fought in 871. Now it
seems very odd that he should have to run away and skulk about in such
places after that.”

“Well,” said he, “I’m not well enough up in the history to explain it
to you, but I’m pretty sure you’ll find I’m right about the dates--why
shouldn’t you write and ask the old gentleman?”

So I did, and I kept a copy of my letter; but I don’t think I need
print that, because his answer will be quite enough without it. Here it
is:--

                                                  “22d September, 1857.

    “My Dear Sir,--I am favoured with yours of the 20th ult., which
    came safely to hand this morning. Our post is somewhat behind
    the times, and I know of hardly any town or village from which
    a letter can arrive at this place under two days. I do not
    myself complain of this state of things.

    “With regard to the subject of your letter, I have to tell you
    that your friend the clergyman is right in his dates. It was in
    the year 878 that Alfred was deserted by his nobles and people
    after the battle of Chippenham, which was a drawn battle. Then
    he fled to the Island of Athelney, in Somersetshire, and the
    incident to which you allude took place, but you have not got
    the verses correctly; they run,--

    “‘Casn’t mind the ke-aks mun, and doosn’t zee ’em burn?
    I’ze warn thee’lt yeat ’em vast enough, zo zoon az ’tiz thy turn.’

    “But you are not to believe from this, that the Danish army
    ever got a hold on the kingdom of Wessex. I think that the
    following passage from Asser’s ‘Life of Alfred’ will explain a
    good deal to you. Referring to his sojourn in Athelney, Asser
    says:--

    “‘We may believe that this misfortune was brought upon the
    aforesaid king, because in the beginning of his reign, when
    he was a youth, and influenced by youthful feelings, he would
    not listen to the petitions which his subjects made to him
    for help in their necessities; but he drove them from him and
    paid no heed to their requests. This particular gave much pain
    to the holy man, St. Neot, who was his kinsman; and often
    foretold to him in the spirit of prophecy that he would suffer
    great adversity on this account; but Alfred neither attended
    to the reproof of the man of God, nor listened to his true
    prophecy--wherefore seeing that a man’s sins must be corrected
    either in this world or the next, the true and righteous Judge
    willed that his sin should not go unpunished in this world, to
    the end that he might spare him in the world to come. From this
    cause, therefore, Alfred often fell into such great misery,
    that sometimes none of his subjects knew where he was, or what
    had become of him.’

    “And Alfred learned his lesson well in the next few years,
    for you will find that in the year 886 A.D., ‘which was the
    thirty-eighth year since his birth, King Alfred, after the
    burning of cities and slaying of the people, honourably rebuilt
    the city of London and made it again habitable, and gave it
    into the custody of his son-in-law, Æthelred, Earl of Mercia;
    to which King Alfred, all the Angles and Saxons, who before
    had been dispersed every where, or were in captivity with the
    pagans, voluntarily turned and submitted themselves to his
    rule!’

    “You see they had turned from his rule many of them because it
    was an unjust one in those early years of his reign. But they
    were never subdued by the Danes,--so that my statement which
    you quote, ‘that the battle of Ashdown saved England from one
    hundred years of Paganism,’ is not shaken.

    “I have directed my London bookseller to leave a copy of
    Asser’s ‘Life of Alfred the Great,’ for you, at Somerset
    House, directed to the care of my friend, the secretary of
    the Antiquaries’ Society; you will find it to be well worth a
    careful perusal. I shall be always glad to hear from you upon
    the subjects on which we have conversed, and heartily desiring
    that the veneration for all that is old may grow upon you, and
    that God may have you in his good keeping, I am faithfully
    yours,

                                                            “----.”

But to return to my subject, from which I have been wandering for the
pleasure of putting in the old gentleman’s letter. The Parson in our
walks set me thinking about fifty subjects which I never cared about
before, because I could see that he was himself deeply interested in
them, and really believed whatever he said to me. We used to get home
by about twelve o’clock, and then I would go away by myself, and think
over what we had been talking about till dinner. And, after dinner,
Miss Lucy, and sometimes Joe, would come out and walk with us till
tea. Sometimes we went to the village school, and I sat at the door
and heard them teaching; and as long as Mr. Warton was with us it was
all right, but afterwards, when he had gone, I could see that the
schoolmistress, a young woman of about thirty, sallow-faced and rather
prudish, used to look at me as if I had no business there.

When he left, Mr. Warton gave me a kind invitation to go and see him
in town, and added he had no doubt I should come, for he could see I
should soon want some such work as he could give me to do.

After he was gone I tumbled fairly head over heels into the net in
which I suppose every man “as is a man” (as old Seeley would say)
gets enmeshed once in his life. I found it was no use to struggle any
longer, and gave myself up to the stream, with all sails set. Now
there is no easier thing than going down stream somehow, when wind and
tide are with you; but to steer so as to make the most of wind and
tide, isn’t so easy--at least I didn’t find it so.

For as often as not, I think, I did the wrong thing, and provoked,
instead of pleasing her. I used to get up every morning before six, to
be ready to wish her good morning as she went out to the dairy; but I
don’t think she half liked it, for she was generally in a very old gown
tucked through her pocket holes, and pattens. Then after breakfast I
used to hanker round the kitchen, or still-room, or wherever she might
happen to be, like a Harry-long-legs round a candle. And again in the
afternoon I never could keep away, but was at her side in the garden,
or on her walks; in fact, to get rid of me, she had fairly to go up to
her room.

But I couldn’t help myself; I felt that, come what might, I must be
near her while I could; and on the whole, I think she was pleased, and
didn’t at all dislike seeing me reduced to this pitiful state.

When I was involuntarily out of her sight, I used to have a sort of
craving for poetry and often wished that I had spent a little more
time over such matters. I got Joe to lend me the key of the cupboard
where he kept his library, hoping to find something to suit me there.
But, besides a few old folios of divinity and travel, and some cookery
books, and the Farmer’s Magazine, there was nothing but Watts’s Hymns
and Pollock’s Course of Time, which I didn’t find of any use to me.

Joe used to wonder at me at first, when I refused his offers of a day’s
coursing, or a ride with him to Farringdon or Didcot markets; but he
soon got used to it, and put it down to my cockney bringing up, and
congratulated himself that, at any rate, I was pretty good company over
a pipe in the kitchen.

The autumn days sped away all too quickly, but I made the most of them
as they passed, and over and over again I wondered whether there were
any but kind and hospitable and amusing people in the Vale, for the
longer I stayed there, the more I was astonished at the kind courtesy
of everybody I came across, from the highest to the lowest, and I
suppose everybody else would find it the same as I did.

It seemed as if I were destined to leave Elm Close without a single
unkind thought of any body I had seen while there, for even Jack made
his peace with me. Only two days before my departure, Miss Lucy gave
out at breakfast that she was going to walk over to see her uncle, and
wanted to know if her mother or Joe had any message. No, they hadn’t.
But of course I managed to accompany her.

When we came to her uncle’s farm, he was out, and in five minutes
Miss Lucy was away with her dear friend and cousin, one of the girls
I had seen at the pastime, and I was left to the tender mercies of
Jack. However, Jack at his own house, with no women by to encourage
him to make a fool of himself, was a very decent fellow. He walked
me about the homestead, and chatted away about the pastime, and the
accomplishments of his terrier dog, whom he had got from the kennel of
the Berkshire hounds, and whose father used to run with them regularly.
Then he began to inquire about me in a patronizing way; how I came to
know Joe, what I was, and where I lived. And when he had satisfied
his curiosity about me, he took to talking about his cousins. Joe, I
soon found out, was his hero; and he looked forward to the time when
he should be able to breed a good horse, like Joe’s chestnut, and to
go about to all the markets and carry his head as high as any one, as
Joe could, as the height of human happiness. As to cousin Lu, if he
were looking out for any thing of the sort, there was no girl within
twenty miles that he knew of to whom she couldn’t give a stone over any
country. But she wasn’t likely to marry any of the young men about; she
was too full of fun, and laughed at them too much. “I shouldn’t be a
bit surprised now, if she was to take to some town chap like you, after
all’s said and done,” said Jack, in conclusion, as we returned to the
house.

My last day at Elm Close came swiftly and surely, and the sun rose, and
went pitilessly up into the heavens, and sank down behind White Horse
Hill, and the clocks went on striking one after another, just as if it
had been any other day. What a number of things I had in my head that
morning to say to all of them, and above all to her; but one thing or
another interfered, and I had said not one quarter of them, and these
not in the way I had intended, before it was dark, and tea on the
table. But I did go all round the farm and the village, and took a last
look at every field and nook and corner where I had been so happy.

The old lady was unusually talkative at tea, and for some time
afterwards. The fact that I was not going to leave the house till after
midnight, and was to be at business, in London, at nine o’clock the
next morning, now that she had realized it, excited her very much, and
waked up all sorts of recollections of her own travels; particularly
how, when she was a child, she had been a whole day getting to Reading
by the stage, and how, even after her marriage, she and father had had
to sleep at Windsor, on the occasion of their one visit to London. I
was watching Miss Lucy at her work all the time, and thought she seemed
a little absent and sorrowful, and when our eyes met every now and
then, she looked away directly. We hardly said a word, and left Joe to
keep up the talk with the old lady.

Before long she got tired and went off to bed, and then, I thought, if
something would only call Joe out--but nothing happened, and so we sat
on talking commonplaces, till prayer time; which, however, Joe did
consent to put off this evening, because it was my last, till past ten
o’clock. The three servants came in, and knelt down as usual; and I,
in a place where I could see her, and watch every turn of her figure,
and hear every breath she drew. I own I didn’t listen to a word that
Joe read--I couldn’t--and I don’t believe any poor fellow in my state
will ever be hardly judged, whatever square-toed people may say, for
not forcing himself to attend when he hasn’t the power to do it. I
only know that, though I couldn’t listen to the prayers, I could and
did thank God for having brought me down there, and allowed me to see
her and know her; and prayed, as heartily as was in me to pray, that I
might never do any thing which might make me unworthy of one so bright,
and pure, and good as she.

And too soon Joe shut the book, and got up, and the servants went out,
and Joe dived off into the recess; and she lighted her candle and
came up to me, holding out her hand, but without saying any thing, or
looking up in my face.

I took the hand which she held out to me in both mine, but somehow,
when I thought it might be for the last time, I couldn’t let it go.
So I stood holding it, my heart beating so that I couldn’t speak, and
feeling very uncomfortable about the throat. She didn’t take it away,
and presently I got my voice again.

“Good bye, Miss Lucy,” said I, “and God bless you. I can’t tell you
what my holiday at Elm Close has been to me--and I can’t find words to
thank you. I’m a poor lonely fellow, with nobody belonging to me, and
leading a slave of a life in the midst of the great crowd, with all
sorts of temptations to go wrong. You’ll let me think of you, and Elm
Close, and it will be like a little bright window with the sun shining
through into our musty clerks’ room. I feel it will help to keep me
straight for many a long day. You’ll let me think of you now, won’t
you?” said I, pressing the little hand which I held in mine.

“Why, you see I can’t help it if I would,” said she, looking up with a
merry light in her eyes; but she went on directly, “but, indeed, I’m
sure we shall think of you quite as often as you will of us. Joe used
to talk so often about you that I felt quite like an old friend before
we met, and now you’ve been here we shall feel so dull without you.”

“Now, you two! don’t stand talking there all night,” said Joe, coming
out of the recess, where he had been rummaging out the pipes and a
black bottle; “come, come, kiss and part.”

I felt the blood rush up to my face, when Joe said that, but I opened
my hands with a jerk, and let hers go, I hardly knew why. If I hadn’t
been so fond that I was afraid of her, I should have taken Joe at his
word. But I’m glad I didn’t; I’m sure I was right, for I stole a look
at her, and saw that she looked vexed, and flushed up to her bright
brown hair. Next moment she held out her hand again, and shook mine
heartily, and said, without looking up, “Good-bye, you must come again
soon,” and then hurried out of the room, and took away all the light
with her. Heigh-ho! when shall I see the light again.

Well, as I followed Joe into the kitchen, what between the sinking I
felt at having to leave, and the doubt whether I hadn’t made a fool of
myself at the last with Miss Lucy, I felt half mad, and the first thing
I made up my mind to was to have a good quarrel with Joe.

So when he sat down on one side of the fire, and began lighting his
pipe, I kept standing looking at him, and thinking how I should begin.

“There’s your pipe, Dick,” said he, puffing away, “on the settle--why
don’t you sit down and light up?”

“I shan’t smoke with you to-night, Joe,” said I, “you ought to be
ashamed of yourself!”

“Ashamed o’ myself,” shouted Joe, staring up at me till I could hardly
keep from laughing, angry as I was; “what, in the name o’ goodness,
have I done to be ashamed of?”

“’Tisn’t what you’ve done, but what you’ve said.”

“Said! what in the world have I said? Precious little I know, for you
always get all the talk to yourself.”

“Why, what you said just now to me and Miss Lucy,” said I.

“To you and Lu?” said he, looking puzzled; and then off he went into
one of his great laughs. “Oh, I take--well, that’s too much! To be
blown up by _you_ for it! Why, if any one is to scold, I should say
it’s Lu.”

“Do you think I like to be made the means of giving your sister pain?”
said I.

“There now, don’t be a fool, Dick--sit down like a good fellow, and
light your pipe. What I said don’t mean any thing down in these parts.
Well, I’m very sorry. She’ll never think twice about it, bless you. And
besides, you know, there can’t be any harm done, for you didn’t take my
advice.”

Well, I began to get cool, and to think I might do something better
than quarrel with Joe the last night; so I took my pipe, and filled it,
and sat down opposite him, and he began to mix two glasses of grog,
twisting his face about all the time to keep himself from laughing.

“Here’s your health, old fellow,” said he, when he had done, “and, mind
you, we shall always be glad to see you here when you can come; though
I’m afraid the place must be terrible dull for a Londoner.”

“It’s the best place I’ve ever been in,” said I, with a sigh.

This pleased Joe; and he went off about what he would find me to do
if I could come down in the winter or the spring; but I didn’t listen
much, for I was making up my mind to speak to him about his sister, and
I was afraid how he might take it.

Presently he stopped for a moment, and I thought, ‘now or never,’ and
began.

“I want to ask you, Joe, is your sister engaged to any one?”

“Not she,” said Joe, looking up rather surprised; “why, she’s only
eighteen come Lady-day!”

“What do you think of Mr. Warton?” said I.

“Our Parson!” laughed Joe; “that is a good ’un. Why he has got a
sweetheart of his own. Let alone that he’d know better than to court a
farmer’s daughter.”

“Are you sure?” said I; “your sister isn’t like most girls, I can tell
you.”

“Yes, I tell you,” said Joe, “he’s no more in love with our Lu than you
are.”

“Then I’m over head and ears in love with her, and that’s all about
it,” said I, and I looked straight across at him, though it wasn’t an
easy thing to do. But I felt I was in for it, and I should be much
better for having it over.

Joe gave a start, and a long whistle; and then a puff or two at his
pipe, staring at me right in the eyes till I felt my head swimming.
But I wasn’t going to look down just then; if he had looked me right
through he couldn’t have found any thing I was ashamed of, so far as
his sister was concerned, and I felt he had a right to look as hard as
he pleased, and that I was bound not to shirk it.

Presently he got up, and took a turn or two up and down the kitchen.
Then he stopped--

“Spoke to her, yet?” said he.

“No,” said I, “I haven’t.”

“Come, give us your hand, Dick,” said he, holding out his, and looking
quite bright again; “I knew you would be all on the square, let be what
might.”

“Well, I won’t deceive you, Joe,” said I, “I don’t deserve any credit
for that.”

“How not?” said he.

“Why, I meant to have spoken to her half-a-dozen times, only one little
thing or another stopped it. But I’m very glad of it, for I think you
ought to know it first.”

“Well, well,” said he, coming and sitting down again, and staring into
the fire, “it’s a precious bad job. Let’s think a bit how we be to
tackle it.”

“I know,” said I, drawing up a bit--for I didn’t feel flattered at this
speech--“that I’m not in the same position you are in, and that you’ve
a right to look for a much richer man than I am for your sister, but--”

“Oh, bother that,” said Joe, beginning to smoke again, and still
staring into the fire; “I wasn’t thinking of that. ’Twill be just as
bad for we, let who will take her. Here’s mother getting a’most blind,
and ’mazing forgetful-like about every thing. Who’s to read her her
chapter, or to find her spectacles? and what in the world’s to become
of the keys? I be no use to mother by myself, you see,” said Joe, “and
I couldn’t abide to see the old lady put about at her time of life; let
alone how the pickling and preserving is to go on.”

I was very pleased and surprised to see him taking it so coolly, and
particularly that he seemed not to be objecting to me, but only to
losing his sister at all.

“Then there’s my dairy,” said he; “that cow Daisy, as gives the richest
milk in all the Vale, nobody could ever get her to stand quiet till Lu
took to her; she’ll kick down a matter o’ six pail o’ milk a week, I’ll
warrant. And the poultry, too; there’s that drattl’d old galleeny’ll be
learning the Spanish hens to lay astray up in the brake, as soon as
ever Lu goes, and then the fox’ll have ’em all. To think of the trouble
I took to get that breed, and not a mossel o’ use at last!”

“Well, but Joe,” said I, “one would think we were going to be married
to-morrow, to hear you talk.”

“Well, you want to be married, don’t you?” said he, looking up.

“Yes, but not directly,” said I; “you see, I should like to have a tidy
place got all ready before I should think--”

“Why, she mayn’t be agreeable after all,” interrupted Joe, as if a new
light had suddenly struck him; and then he had a good laugh at the
thought, in which I didn’t join.

“Then, Joe,” said I, “I think you don’t seem to mind my being a
cockney, and not a rich man?”

“I’d sooner have had a chap that knows a horse from a handspike, and
something about four-course,” said he, “so I won’t tell a lie about it,
Dick. Put that out of the way, and I’d as lief call you brother-in-law
as any man. But you ain’t in any hurry you said just now?”

“Well, no,” said I; “but of course I should like to write to your
sister directly and tell her, and I hope you won’t object to that, and
won’t hinder me if you can’t help me.”

“Don’t have any of that writing,” said Joe, “’pend upon it, a good-bred
girl like Lu wouldn’t stand it.”

“That’s all very well,” said I, “but I’m going away to-night, you know,
and if I don’t write how’s she ever to know any thing about it?”

“Look here,” said Joe; “will you promise, Dick, to give me and mother a
year to turn round in from next Christmas--that is, supposing Lu don’t
say no?”

“Yes, certainly,” said I; “Christmas year is the earliest time I could
hope to be ready by.”

“Then I’ll tell you what,” said he; “Don’t you go writing to her at
all, and I’ll bring her up with me for Christmas cattle-show, and you
can get us lodgings, and show us some of the sights. You can have it
all out with her before we come home, and I shall be by to see all
fair.”

“No, no, Joe, I couldn’t say a word with you by.”

“I didn’t mean that I was to be in the room, you know, only if any
thing goes wrong--you understand,” said Joe, looking round, and nodding
at me with a solemn face.

“Yes, I see,” said I; “but somebody else--one of the young farmers now,
that I saw on the hill, may be stepping in before Christmas.”

“Not they. It’s busy times with us these next two months. Besides, I’ll
look after that. Is it a bargain, then?”

“Yes,” said I, “only mind, Joe, that you look sharp meantime.”

“All right,” said he; and then fell to looking into the fire again;
and I sat thinking too, and wondering at my luck, which I could hardly
believe in yet.

“And now about the pot,” said Joe; “suppose Lu says yes, what have you
got to keep the pot boiling?”

Then I told him what my salary was, and what I had saved, and where I
had put it out, and he nodded away, and seemed very well satisfied.

“Well, Lu has got £500,” said he, “under father’s will. Parson and I
are the executors. You must go and see the Parson when you get back
to London; he’s an out-and-outer, and worth more than all the chaps at
that jawing shop of yours put together. The money is out at interest,
all but £200, which we’ve never raised yet, but for that matter I can
pay it up whenever it’s wanted.”

“Of course,” said I, “I should wish all her fortune to be settled on
her.”

“Yes, I forgot,” said he; “I suppose there ought to be some sort of
tying-up done for the children. So I’ll go and see Lawyer Smith about
it next market-day.”

“Perhaps you had better wait till after Christmas,” said I.

“Aye, aye,” said he, “I forgot. We may be running a tail scent after
all. But, I say, Dick, if you get married, Lu can never live in those
dirty, dark streets, and you away all day; she’d mope to death without
a place for poultry, and a little bit of turf to cool her feet on.”

“Well,” said I, “you see I’ve got a bit of ground under a freehold land
society, down the Great Northern line. It’s a very pretty place, and
only five minutes’ walk from a station. I could build a house there in
the spring, you know, and have the garden made.”

“That’ll do,” said he; “and if you want £100 or so, to finish it off as
should be, why you know where to come for it.”

“Thank you,” said I, “but I think I can manage it.”

“I shall send her up those Spanish hens,” said he, looking up again
presently from his pipe; “they won’t be no use here.”

“I wish, Joe,” said I, “you wouldn’t talk as if it was all quite
certain; it makes me feel uncomfortable. Your sister mayn’t like me,
after all.”

“Makes no odds at all,” said he; “if she don’t have you, there’ll be
some other chap on in no time. Once a young gal gets a follower it’s
all over, so fur as I see; though ’tisn’t always the first as they
takes up with as they sticks to for better for worse.”

“Thank you for nothing, Master Joe,” said I to myself; and I smoked
away opposite him for some time without saying a word, thinking what a
queer fellow he was, and how I had better let things rest as they were,
for I couldn’t see how to handle him the least bit in the world; and I
can’t tell whether I was most glad or sorry, when we heard the fogger
come to the kitchen door to say the trap was all ready.

Joe knocked the ashes out of his last pipe, took off the last drop out
of his tumbler, and then put out his hand and gave me one of his grips.

“It’s got to be done,” said he, “there’s no mistake about that.”

“What?” said I, “what’s to be done? Don’t look so solemn, Joe, for
goodness’ sake.”

“It’s no laughing matter, mind you,” said he; and he took the candle
and went off into the passage, and came back with his whip and two
top-coats. “Here, you get into that,” he went on, handing me one of
them; “you’ll find the night rawish.”

I buttoned myself into the coat, which was a white drab one, about as
thick as a deal board, with double seams and mother-of-pearl buttons as
big as cheese-plates, and followed Joe into the yard with a heavy heart.

“Carpet-bag and hamper in?” said he, taking the reins.

“Ees, Sir, all right.”

“Jump up, Dick.”

I shook hands with the honest fogger, and gave him half-a-crown, which
he didn’t seem to know how to take; and then I got up by Joe’s side,
and we walked out of the yard at a foot’s pace, on to the grass; he
kept off the road to be more quiet. It was bright moonlight, and a
streak of white mist lay along the Close. I could hear nothing but the
soft crush of the wheels on the rich sward, and the breathing of the
great cows as we passed them in the mist. But my heart was beating like
a hammer, as I looked back over my shoulder at one window of the old
house, until it was hidden behind the elm-trees; and when I jumped down
to open the gate into the road, I tore open the great coat, or I think
I should have been suffocated.

“It’s no laughing matter, mind you,” said Joe, looking round, after we
had gone about half-a-mile along the road at a steady trot.

“No, indeed,” said I. I felt much more like crying, and I thought he
was trying to comfort me, in his way.

“Come, you button up that coat again, Dick; I won’t have you getting
into the train at one in the morning with a chill on you. I won’t turn
my back,” he went on, “on any man in the county at sampling wheat, or
buying a horse, or a lot of heifers, or a flock of sheep. Besides,
if a chap does get the blind side of me, it’s maybe a ten-pound note
lost, and there’s an end of it. But when you come to choosing a missus,
why, it seems like jumping in the dark, for all as I can see. There’s
nothing to sample ’em by, and you can’t look in their mouths or feel
’em over. I don’t take it as a man’s judgment of any account when he
comes to that deal--and then, if he does get the wrong sort!”

“Thank you, Joe,” said I, “but I’m not a bit afraid about getting the
wrong sort, if all goes well.”

“No, but I be,” said he; “why, one would think, Dick, that nobody had
to get a missus but you.”

Well, that made me laugh out, I was so tickled to find he was thinking
of himself all the time; and for the rest of the drive we were merry
enough, for he went on talking about his own prospects so funnily that
it was impossible to keep sad or sentimental.

We drew up at the silent station five or six minutes nearly before the
train was due, and were received by the one solitary porter.

“What luggage, Sir?” said he to me, as I got down.

“One carpet-bag,” I answered, “for Paddington.”

“And a hamper,” said Joe; “you’ll find a hamper in behind there. And
take care to keep it right side up, porter, for there are some pots of
jam in it.”

“Who is it for?” said I; “can I look after it, and take it any where
for you?”

“Why, for you, of course,” said Joe; “you don’t suppose the women would
have let you go back without some of their kickshaws; and I’ve had a
hare and a couple of chickens put in, and some bacon. You must eat the
hare this week, mind.”

I was quite taken by surprise at this fresh instance of the thoughtful
kindness of my Vale friends, and wrung Joe’s hand, mumbling out
something which I meant for thanks.

“Well, good-bye, old fellow,” he said, “I’m very glad to think you’ve
found your way down at last, and now, don’t forget it;” and he gave
me a grip which nearly crashed all my knuckles into a jelly, and was
gathering up his reins to drive off.

“But Joe, here’s your coat,” I called out, and was beginning to take it
off--“you’ve forgotten your coat.”

“No, no,” said he, “keep it on--’twill be very cold to-night, and
you’ll want it in the train. We’ll fetch it at Christmas, and the
hamper and the jam pots too, at the same time. Lu will be sure to look
after them, so mind you don’t lose ’em--Hullo! What in the world are
you cutting off the direction for?”

“Oh, it’s nothing,” said I, “but I often fancy parcels go safer with
only the railway label on them. Besides, I shall have it in the
carriage with me.”

The fact was I had caught sight of the direction, which was in her
handwriting, and had quite forgotten Joe, as I was cutting it off to
put it in my pocket-book.

“Well, that’s a rum start,” said Joe, “but every one has their own
notions about travelling;” and so, with a cheery good-bye to me, off he
drove along the dark road; and in another minute the train came up, and
I and my luggage were on our way to London.

We went away up through the cold night, eastward, towards the great
city which had been my home from childhood. I felt that another man
was journeying back from the one who had come down a fortnight before;
that he who was travelling eastward had learnt to look beyond his
own narrow cellar in the great world-city, to believe in other things
than cash payments and shorthand for making his cellar liveable in,
to have glimpses of and to sympathize with the life of other men, in
his own time, and in the old times before him. These thoughts crowded
on me, but all under the shadow of and subordinated to the one great
rising hope, in which I had first found and felt my new life. Together
they lifted up my heart during the first stages of that night journey,
and I opened the window and leant out into the rushing night air, for
the carriage was too small for me, and my grand visions and resolves.
But soon it began to feel cold, and I shut up the window and squeezed
myself into a corner with my feet up on the opposite seat, and felt
very thankful that I had on Joe’s great coat. Then the lamp went out,
and it got colder as the dawn came on, and my visions and resolves
began to get less bright and firm. The other side of the picture rose
up in ugly colours, and I thought of the dirty dark clerks’ room, and
the hours of oil-lamps and bad air, and the heartless whirl and din
of the great city. And to crown all came the more than doubt whether
my hope would not fade out and die in the recesses of my own heart.
What was I? and what my prospects, that any one should ever give me a
thought again of those whom I was so fast leaving behind, much more
that she, the flower of them all, should single me out before all
others? It was absurd, I should most likely never see Elm Close, or the
Vale, or the great mysterious Hill again--I had better make up my mind
to live the next twenty years as I had the last. With some such meaning
spoke the doleful voices, but I was never much of a hand at looking at
the doleful side of things, and I made good strong fight on that night
ride; and took out my pipe, and lit it, and pressed my back firmer into
my corner.

Well, and if they don’t remember me, thought I, I can remember them at
any rate--they can’t help that; and I _will_ remember them too, and
all their kind pleasant ways, and their manlike games, and their queer
songs and stories--and the queen of them all, I can carry her in my
heart, thank God for that, and every word I ever heard her speak, and
every smile I ever saw light up her merry eyes or dimple round her
mouth--and the country, too, the fair rich Vale, and the glorious old
Hill, they are mine for ever, and all the memories of the slaying of
dragons; and of great battles with the Pagan. I wonder whether I shall
ever see the old gentleman again who conjured it up for me, and put
life into it, and made me feel as if King Alfred and his Saxons were as
near and dear to me as Sir Colin Campbell and the brave lads in India!

Just then the train stopped at Reading, and the guard put his head in
to say we stopped for three minutes, and I could get a glass of ale.

So I jumped out and had a glass of ale, and then another; and stamped
about the platform till the train started. And when I got into my
corner again, I was quite warm and jolly.

I have been always used to a good night’s rest, and I daresay the ale
made me more sleepy, and so I fell into a kind of doze almost directly.
But in my doze the same train of thought went on, and all the people
I had been living with and hearing of flitted about in the oddest
jumbles, with Elm Close and White Horse Hill for a background. I went
through the strangest scenes. One minute I was first cousin to King
Alfred, and trying to carry his messages over the Hill to Æthelred,
only Joe’s old brown horse would run away with me along the Ridgeway;
then I was the leader of the Berkshire old gamesters, playing out the
last tie with a highwayman, for a gold-laced hat and pair of buckskin
breeches; then I was married--I needn’t say to whom--and we were
keeping house under the Hill, and waiting tea for St. George, when he
should come down from killing the Dragon. And so it went on, till at
last a mist came over the Hill, and all the figures got fainter and
fainter, and seemed to be fading away. But as they faded, I could see
one great figure coming out clearer through the mist, which I had never
noticed before. It was like a grand old man, with white hair and mighty
limbs; who looked as old as the hill itself, but yet as if he were as
young now as he ever had been,--and at his feet were a pickaxe and
spade, and at his side a scythe. But great and solemn as it looked,
I felt that the figure was not a man, and I was angry with it,--why
should it come in with its great pitiful eyes and smile? why were my
brothers and sisters, the men and women, to fade away before it?

“The labour that a man doeth under the sun, it is all vanity. Prince
and peasant, the wise man and the fool, they all come to me at last,
and I garner them away, and their place knows them no more!”--so the
figure seemed to say to itself, and I felt melancholy as I watched it
sitting there at rest, playing with the fading figures.

At last it placed one of the little figures on its knee, half in
mockery, as it seemed to me, and half in sorrow. But then all changed;
and the great figure began to fade, and the small man came out clearer
and clearer. And he took no heed of his great neighbour, but rested
there where he was placed; and his face was quiet, and full of life, as
he gazed steadily and earnestly through the mist. And the other figures
came flitting by again, and chanted as they passed, “The work of one
true man is greater than all thy work. Thou hast nought but a seeming
power, over it, or over him. Every true man is greater than thee. Every
true man shall conquer more than thee; for he shall triumph over death,
and hell, and thee, oh, Time!”

And then I woke up, for the train stopped at the place where the
tickets are collected; and, in another five minutes, I was in a cab,
with my bag and the great basket of country treasures, creeping along
in the early November morning towards Gray’s Inn Lane. And so ended my
fortnight’s holiday.

[Illustration]




THE SERMON WHICH THE PARSON SENT TO MR. JOSEPH HURST, OF ELM CLOSE
FARM, IN FULFILMENT OF HIS PROMISE.

    LEVITICUS xxiii. v. 1, 2.--And the Lord spake unto Moses,
    saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them,
    Concerning the feasts of the Lord which ye shall proclaim to be
    holy convocations, even these are my feasts.


“These are _my_ feasts,” said God to the nation He was educating; “keep
these feasts, for they are mine.” Now, what was the nature of these
feasts, my brethren, which God called his? The Bible leaves us in no
doubt about them. They were certain seasons set apart in every year,
and at longer intervals, during which the nation was “to rejoice before
the Lord their God.” Each feast commemorated some event in the nation’s
life; either a solemn act of national worship, such as the dedication
of the Temple; or some great national deliverance, such as the Exodus
commemorated by the feast of Passover, or the defeat of Haman’s plot in
the reign of Ahasuerus, commemorated by the feast Purim; or the daily
care of God for his people, in giving them rain and fruitful seasons,
the harvest and vintage, the increase of corn, and wine, and oil,
commemorated by the feast of Pentecost.

They were _to rejoice_ before the Lord their God at all these feasts.
With what outward actions they were to rejoice we are not expressly
told; probably it was left to each generation to express their joy in
their own way. In the case of the Passover we know that they were to
eat a lamb and unleavened bread; and we gather, I think, from many
places, that both songs and dancing were freely used at the feasts; but
further than this we do not know the outward form of their rejoicing.

But we _do_ know the spirit in which they were to keep their feasts,
the temper of mind in which God would have them rejoice before Him.
This is most fully proclaimed. They were to keep alive in themselves
and one another the memory of the great deliverances and blessings,
which had been, and were being wrought for them. They were to remember
that these deliverances had been wrought for ignorant despised bondmen,
that these blessings were being poured down on a stiffnecked sinful
people. Remembering these things, they were to come to their feasts,
and rejoice before Him, with humble open hearts, thanking Him for all
they possessed, with love towards their brethren, ready to forgive
debts, to help the poor to his right, and to acknowledge and glory in
the bond which bound them all together in one nation.

Moreover, these feasts were to be feasts for the whole nation--for
the rich and the poor, the free man and the slave, “for thee, and thy
man-servant, and thy maid-servant;” for those who are in trouble and
sorrow, as well as for the prosperous and happy; “for the stranger, and
fatherless, and widow who are within thy gates.”

One thing more I wish you to notice about the Jewish feasts; they
had all the same character, all were God’s feasts--not one or two
religious feasts, as we should say, and the rest national, but all
God’s feasts, and all national also. There is no hint in the Bible of
any distinction; all feasts ordained for the nation are God’s feasts,
and their feasts also.

Now such feasts--such rejoicings before the Lord--as these, you can
see at once must have had no slight influence on the nation which kept
them. Accordingly we find them interwoven with every fibre of the
national life: sometimes kept as God’s feasts--as He had said they
were to be kept--in humbleness and thankfulness, in breaking bonds and
forgiving debts; often, as though they had been not his but the devil’s
feasts, in persecuting prophets and slaying righteous men; and no doubt
also, as the natural consequence, in debauchery, gluttony, and hard
and usurious dealings with one another; in oppression of man-servant
and maid-servant, the widow, the fatherless, and the stranger. But in
whatever way the feasts were kept they were always exercising a great
power over generation after generation.

I have begun by talking to you about the Jewish feasts, my brethren,
because I want to speak to you about our English feasts; and I think
if we understand their feasts we shall very likely learn some lessons
about our own which may do us good. Now we English, my brethren, as a
nation, have neglected this matter of feasts too much. We have very few
days on which we rejoice as a nation--in fact the Queen’s birthday is
almost our only national holiday, and this day we keep as Englishmen,
and not as Christians; while the feasts which we keep as Christians,
and not as Englishmen (such as Christmas, and Easter, and Whitsuntide),
have for this very reason lost much of their worth for us; which we
shall recover, when we begin to keep them again, not the less as
Christians, but more as Englishmen.

It is my earnest hope and prayer that we may mend in this matter,
and that the great Christian festivals and the Queen’s birthday may
so become all, and more than all, to us and our children, which the
Passover and Pentecost were to the Jews. But that it may be so, we
must, in this as in all other matters, begin mending at home, in our
own families, and our own parishes. And so, my brethren, let us to-day
think about the feasts which we keep who live in this parish, in the
Vale of White Horse, who worship in this church.

We all know well enough what these feasts are. First, there is our
village feast, a day set apart in every year which is specially _the_
feast day of this parish, and of all who belong to it. Then there are
our harvest homes, which are not parish but family festivals; when
the farmer and those who have worked with him, rejoice together over
the garnering in of the fruits which God has given. Lastly, there is
the feast which does not come every year, but at longer intervals,
the feast of Scouring the White Horse, which is not the feast of one
parish, but of the whole country side.

A few words as to the meaning of these feasts of ours. The first is the
commemoration of the opening of this parish church, and its dedication
to the worship of God. Your harvest homes you know the meaning of as
well as I. The third is the commemoration of a great victory, won a
thousand years ago by the king of this country against an army of
heathen invaders. I remind you of these things because they have been
too much forgotten, and we never can rightly use our feasts till we
remember them better.

Well, now, remember what I have told you about the Jewish feasts, or
rather take your Bibles and look for yourselves, whether I tell you
the truth, when I say, that our feasts are just such feasts as those
which you read of there. The feasts of the Jews were all either feasts
in remembrance of the dedication of the Temple, or of thanksgiving for
the good gifts of God, or of commemoration for some great national
deliverance.

And ours are the very same. Do not think I am dealing unfairly with
you in comparing our country feasts to the great national feasts
of the Jews. It is not unfair to compare small things with great:
families, parishes, nations, must stand or fall by the same laws. A
society cannot do evil or good without reaping the fruits thereof,
whether it be very small or very great. Do not think that I ought to
speak of the great Christian festivals, Christmas and Easter; they are
better understood and kept, though very badly as yet. I believe I am
taking the right way to make you understand and keep these world-wide
Christian feasts properly by bringing you down to these common
insignificant feasts of ours, which we, the members of this parish and
congregation, have power over; which we can make good or evil; for the
use or abuse of which we shall be called to account by God.

For “thus saith the Lord,” to us as He said to the Jews, “these are
_my_ feasts.” They are his, my brethren, whether we like it or not;
they are his, though we may try to make them ours, and so make them the
devil’s. There is no neutral ground, no escape from the hard fact. Let
us see now if we cannot accept them, and use them as his. Let us see
whether they will be less or more to us if we do so. We shall find the
trial worth making, I think, in the end.

They are his feasts: how, then, can we come to them as his
guests--guests who will be pleasing to him, who will use his feasts as
he would have us? For if we go to a man’s feast, the first thing we
have to do is to go in such a temper and such a dress as will make us
acceptable guests; and shall we do less as the guests of God?

The first thing, then, we have to consider is the temper, the state
of mind in which we should go to our feasts; and here, as I said
before, the Bible tells us all we want to know. The temper which he
required of the Jews, he will require of us. At his feasts we have
specially two things to do, to remember and to rejoice. To remember
the loving-kindness which he has shown to our fathers and to us, in
delivering us many a time from the hand of enemies who were stronger
than we; in giving us a Church, where for many hundred years the
prayers of generation after generation had gone up to him, the God of
all truth; in giving us the rich increase of his earth, year after
year. Remembering these things, then, we are to keep the feast in
humility, for our own unworthiness; in thankfulness, for his tender
care and unbounded love.

And we are also to rejoice before him, as members of a family, of
a parish, of a country; thinking, therefore, of others, and not of
ourselves; making up quarrels, exercising hospitality to all according
to our means, seeking to do kindnesses to all who need them, to our
debtors, to the oppressed and unfortunate amongst us, to the widows,
the fatherless, and the stranger; and in all ways strengthening and
deepening the bond which binds us to one another, and to him.

This, my brethren, is the temper and state of mind which he required
of the Jews of old, and which he requires of us at these times
especially. Think what our feasts would be, what our whole lives would
be, if we tried to remember and to rejoice before the Lord thus.

If we come to his feasts in this temper, my brethren, it matters
comparatively little what our outward acts of rejoicing may be. If our
hearts are right towards the Lord of the feast and to one another,
our dress and actions are surely right also, or will soon become so.
Nevertheless, this is a matter of plain, practical importance, and I am
not going to shrink from it. I wish to consider with you, how we keep
his feasts and our feasts now; whether our method of keeping them is
a true expression of that temper and spirit in which they ought to be
kept, whether any thing better can be suggested.

On these points, as I said above, we have not the same help which we
had before. We know very little of how the Jews rejoiced; we may be
sure that we are not meant to copy the little we do know, such as the
eating of a lamb roasted whole with unleavened bread. It is left for
us to find out, and to do, such acts as may be done by those who are
humble, and thankful, and loving in heart, towards God and towards each
other.

Now there is one thing which one sees at once is wanting in our
celebration of these feasts. In the times when they were established,
it was the chief act of them, that which gave meaning to them, and
kept alive that meaning. We have neglected and disused it, and so they
have become all but meaningless to us, mere seasons in which we are
to enjoy more pleasures than in ordinary times. This thing which we
have forgotten is public fellow-worship, and it ought to be restored
as soon as possible. At the yearly meetings of many of your benefit
and other clubs, the members go all together to the church, and there
worship before attending to their business and their pleasure. Why
should not a parish do the same? I know nothing which would so easily
and so effectually raise the tone of our village feast as the regular
celebration of worship on that day, in the Church, the dedication and
consecration of which, to the worship of God, was the cause of the
holiday.

In one respect I believe that we are, to some extent, still keeping
the feast as we ought. I believe that on that day young people who
were born in the parish and have left it, make a point, if possible,
of getting back to see their fathers and mothers, and friends, and to
revive old associations, often bringing with them part of their wages
or some present; that many of the silly quarrels and feuds which have
arisen during the year are then set to rest; that the residents in
the parish make some exertion to welcome their visitors hospitably,
and that a general kindly feeling is common throughout the parish. I
believe that this is still so, to some extent; but I fear that it is
becoming less and less so. My brethren, all this is right, and true,
and honest; this is the way to keep God’s feasts; you can’t go too far
in this direction (except by spending more money than you can afford,
which is always wrong). But the more you can deepen old family and
local ties on these occasions, the more you can heal up quarrels, and
forgive debts (both other debts, and money debts--remember that there
is no duty more insisted on in God’s Word than this of forgiving money
debts at these times), and exercise hospitality one to another without
grudging, the more will you be keeping God’s feasts as he would have
you keep them.

Then there are the sports for which prizes are given. There is no need
to specify them all, and I shall therefore only speak of the one which
is considered the most objectionable--which many people think should be
stopped altogether--I mean wrestling. Whatever I may say on this will
apply to all the rest. Now, my brethren, are wrestling matches a proper
way of keeping God’s feasts? That is the question we have to answer.

The object of wrestling and of all other athletic sports is to
strengthen men’s bodies, and to teach them to use their strength
readily, to keep their tempers, to endure fatigue and pain. These are
all noble ends, my brethren. God gives us few more valuable gifts than
strength of body, and courage, and endurance--to you labouring men they
are beyond all price. We ought to cultivate them in all right ways, for
they are given us to protect the weak, to subdue the earth, to fight
for our homes and country if necessary.

Therefore I say that wrestling, inasmuch as it is a severe trial of
strength, temper, and endurance, may be, and ought to be, one of many
right and proper ways of rejoicing before God at these feasts. And
I say to any man who has strength for it, and can keep his temper,
and carries away no vain or proud thoughts if he wins, and no angry
or revengeful thoughts if he loses, play by all means. No doubt there
are men who ought not to play, who ought to abstain wholly from these
games, as some men ought to abstain wholly from drink, who cannot use
such things temperately, which is the more worthy and manly way--men so
constituted that these sort of games rouse all that is brutal in their
natures, others who become braggarts and bullies from success in them.
To such men (and each of you can easily find out whether he is such a
man) I say abstain wholly.

Having said this, brethren, I must add that great changes should be
made in the conduct or management of these games. They should never, on
any pretence or plea whatever, be left in the hands of publicans. You
should always endeavour to play in sides (as is, I believe, the most
common custom) for your county or your parish, and not for yourselves,
as you are much more likely in that way to play bravely and fairly.
Money prizes should be if possible avoided, for money is the lowest
motive for which men can undertake any work or any game. And lastly,
every one of you should exercise his whole strength and influence in
putting down at once all brutality and bluster and foul play.

As to the rest of the amusements, the visiting shows, the eating and
drinking, the dancing and music, I believe them all in themselves to be
lawful and right in the sight of God, and fit things to do when we are
rejoicing before Him. But, my brethren, I do _not_ think them lawful
and right, or fit things to be done before anybody but the devil, when
they end in such scenes as, I fear--as I know--they often do end in at
our feasts. No wonder that the feasts are falling off year by year;
that they cease to interest decent and respectable people who used to
care about them, when they are deliberately turned by some into scenes
of drunkenness and profligacy, which can scarcely be surpassed amongst
savages and heathens.

I need not dwell on this, for you all know well enough what I mean.
You all know, too--the voice within you tells each of you plainly
enough--the moment you are going beyond the proper limits in these
matters. It is no use to lay down rules on such subjects. Every man
and every woman must be a law to themselves. One can do safely what
would ruin another. And here again I say, as I said before, the use
of these things is right and good, and what God approves of, who in
his infinite love has given us the power of enjoying all these things,
and the things themselves to enjoy--music, and dancing, and pleasant
company, and food and drink. The abuse of them is of the devil, and
destroys body and soul.

I beseech you all to think of what I have said, and endeavour, each
in your own way, to retain, or to bring back, if necessary, God’s
feasts into your own parishes. You, old and grown-up men and women, by
living soberly and righteously; never making mischief, or quarrelling;
treating your children with forbearance and love, doing your own work,
and helping others to do theirs. To you young men, I say, as Solomon
said, rejoice in your youth; rejoice in your strength of body, and
elasticity of spirits, and the courage which follows from these; but
remember that for these gifts you will be judged--not condemned, mind,
but judged. You will have to show before a Judge who knoweth your
inmost hearts, that you have used these his great gifts well; that you
have been pure, and manly, and true.

And to you, young women, I can but say the same. Beauty, and purity,
and youth, and merry light hearts, and all the numberless attractions
which have been poured upon you, are tremendous influences for good
or evil,--gifts for which you will have to give an account. Rejoice
in them; use them freely; but avoid, as you would death itself, all
rivalry with one another, all attempts to exercise power over men you
do not care for, every light thought, and word, and look. For the light
word or look is but a step from the impure, and the experience of the
whole world is telling you

    “How mirth can into folly glide,
    And folly into sin.”

But now to conclude. You may ask, how are we all to keep these things
in mind? how, when we are all met together to enjoy ourselves, can we
be ever on the watch for this evil, which you say is so near us? You
cannot, my brethren; but One is with you, is in you, who can and will,
if you will let him.

Men found this out in the old time, and have felt it and known it
ever since. Three thousand years ago this truth dawned upon the old
Psalmist, and struck him with awe. He struggled with it; he tried to
escape from it, but in vain. “Whither shall I go then,” he says, “from
thy spirit? or whither shall I flee then from thy presence? If I go up
to heaven, Thou art there: if I go down to hell, Thou art there also.
If I take the wings of the morning, and reside in the uttermost parts
of the sea; even there also shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand
shall hold me.”

Is any of us stronger or wiser than the Psalmist? Is there any place
for us to flee to, which was not open to him? My brethren, had we not
better make up our minds to accept and acknowledge the truth, to which
our own consciences bear witness; that, not only in heaven, and in
hell, and in the uttermost parts of sea and earth, He is present, but
that in the inmost recesses of our own hearts there is no escape from
his Spirit--that He is there also, sustaining us, pleading with us,
punishing us.

We know it by the regret we feel for time wasted and opportunities
neglected; by the loathing coming back to us, time after time, for our
every untrue or mean thought, word, or deed; by every longing after
truth, and righteousness, and purity, which stirs our sluggish souls.
By all these things, and in a thousand other ways, we feel it, we know
it.

Let us, then, come to our feasts owning this, and giving ourselves up
to his guidance. At first it will be hard work; our will and spirits
will be like a lump of ice in a man’s hand, which yields but slowly
to the warm pressure. But do not despair; throw yourselves on his
guidance, and he will guide you, he will hide you under his wings, you
shall be safe under his feathers, his faithfulness and truth shall be
your shield and buckler.

The ice will melt into water, and the water will lie there in the
hollow of the hand, moving at the slightest motion, obeying every
impulse which is given to it.

My brethren, the Spirit of God which is in every one of us--the Spirit
of truth and love unchangeable--will take possession of our spirits,
if we will but let him, and turn not only our feasts into feasts of
the Lord, but our whole lives into the lives of children of God, and
joint-heirs of heaven with his Son.

[Illustration]




APPENDIX.

[Illustration]


NOTE I.

The earliest authentic historical notices of the White Horse are, so
far as I am aware,--

1st. A Cartulary of the Abbey of Abingdon, now in the British Museum,
of the time of Henry II., the exact date of it being, it is believed,
A.D. 1171. It runs as follows: “Consuetudinis apud Anglos tunc erat, ut
monachi qui vellent pecuniarum patrimoniorum qui forent susceptibiles,
ipsisque fruentes quomodo placeret dispensarent. Unde et in Abbendonia
duo, Leofricus et Godricus Cild appellati, quorum unus Godricus,
Spersholt juxta locum qui vulgo mons Albi Equi nuncupatur, alter
Leofricus Hwitceorce super flumen Tamisie maneria sita patrimoniali
jure obtinebant,” &c.

2dly. Another Cartulary of the same Abbey, of the reign of Richard I.,
which runs as follows: “Prope montem ubi ad Album Equum scanditur, ab
antiquo tempore Ecclesia ista manerium Offentum appellatum in dominio
possidet, juxta quod villa X hidarum adjacet ex jure Ecclesiæ quam
Speresholt nominavit,” &c.

3dly. An entry on the Close Rolls, 42 Ed. III., or A.D.
1368-9:--“Gerard de l’Isle tient en la vale de White Horse one fee,”
&c. See Archæologia, vol. xxxi. p. 290. Letter from William Thoms, Esq.
to J. Y. Ackerman, Esq., Secretary.

Coming down to comparatively modern times, it is curious that so little
notice should have been taken of the White Horse by our antiquaries.
Wise, in his Letter to Dr. Mead (1738), which has been already quoted
from in the text, regrets this, and then adds: “Leland’s journey does
not seem to have carried him this way, nor does Camden here go out of
the other’s track; though he mentions, upon another occasion, and by
the bye, _The White Horse_; but in such a manner, that I could wish,
for his own sake, he had passed it over in silence with the rest. For
his own account is altogether so unbecoming so faithful and accurate
an author, insinuating to his readers that it has no existence but in
the imagination of country people. ‘_The Thames_,’ says he, ‘_falls
into a valley, which they call_ The Vale of White Horse, _from I know
not what shape of a Horse fancied on the side of a whitish Hill_.’ Much
nearer to the truth is Mr. Aubrey, however wide of the mark, who, in
the additions to the Britannia, says: ‘I leave others to determine,
whether the White Horse on the Hill was made by Hengist, since the
Horse was the arms or figure in Hengist’s standard.’ The author of a
‘Tour through England,’ is a little more particular, though he leaves
us as much in the dark about the antiquity and design of it. ‘Between
this town of Marlborow and Abingdon, is the Vale of White Horse. The
inhabitants tell a great many fabulous stories of the original of its
name; but there is nothing of foundation in them, that I could find.
The whole of the story is this: Looking south from the Vale, we see a
trench cut on the side of a high, green hill, in the shape of a horse,
and not ill-shaped neither; the trench is about a yard deep, and filled
almost up with chalk, so that at a distance you see the exact shape
of a White Horse, but so large, as to take up near an acre of ground,
some say almost two acres. From this figure, the Hill is called in our
maps, White Horse Hill, and the low or flat country under it the Vale
of White Horse.’ (See pp. 30, 31.)


NOTE II.

Medeshamstede, however, was restored with great splendour in the year
963. The account in the Saxon Chronicle is so illustrative of what was
going on in England at the time, that I think I may be allowed to give
it, especially as the restoration was the work of a Vale of White Horse
man, Ethelwold, Abbot of Abingdon, who was in this year made Bishop of
Winchester.

Edgar was king, and Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury--Ethelwold, after
strong measures at Winchester, (where “he drove the clerks out of the
bishopric because they would not observe any rule, and he set the monks
there,”) “went to the king and begged of him that he would give him all
the minsters which heathen men had of old time broken down, because he
would restore them; and the king joyfully granted it.” Then he restored
Ely, and “after that came Bishop Ethelwold to the minster which was
called Medeshamstede, which of old time had been destroyed by heathen
men. He found nothing there but old walls and wild woods. There found
he hidden in the old walls writings that Abbot Hudda had erewhile
written, how king Wulfhere and Ethelred his brother had built it, and
how they had freed it against king and against bishop, and against all
secular service, and how the pope Agatho had confirmed the same by his
rescript, and the archbishop ‘deo dedit.’ Then caused he the minster
to be built, and set there an abbot who was called Adulf, and caused
monks to be there where before was nothing. Then came he to the king
and caused him to look at the writings which before were found, and the
king answered then and said, I, Edgar, grant and give to-day before God
and before the Archbishop Dunstan, freedom to St. Peter’s minster, from
king and from bishop, and all the villages that lie thereto, that is to
say, Eastfield, and Dodthorp, and Eye, and Paxton. And thus I free it,
that no bishop have there any command without the abbot of the minster.
And I give the town which is called Oundle, with all which thereto
lieth, that is to say, that which is called ‘the eight hundreds,’ and
market and toll so freely that neither king, nor bishop, nor earl, nor
sheriff have there any command, nor any man except the Abbot alone and
him whom he thereto appointeth”--and after giving other lands to Christ
and St. Peter through the prayer of Bishop Ethelwold, “with sack and
sock, toll and team, and infangthief,” and willing “that a market be
in the same town, and no other be between Stamford and Huntingdon,”
the king ends: “And I will that all liberties and all the remissions
that my predecessors have given, that they stand, and I sign and
confirm it with Christ’s rood token. ✠” “Then Dunstan the Archbishop
of Canterbury answered and said, I grant that all the things which are
here given and spoken of, and all the things which thy predecessors
and mine have conceded, those will I that they stand; and whosoever
this breaketh, then give I him the curse of God, and of all saints, and
of all ordained heads, and of myself, unless he come to repentance. And
I give in acknowledgment to St. Peter my mass-hackel, and my stole, and
my reef, for the service of Christ.” “I, Oswald, Archbishop of York,
assent to all these words, by the holy rood which Christ suffered on. ✠”
“I, Ethelwold, bless all who shall observe this, and I excommunicate
all who shall break this, unless he come to repentance.” So the minster
at Medeshamstede was set up again under Adulf, who bought lands and
greatly enriched it, till Oswald died, and he was chosen Archbishop of
York, and was succeeded as abbot by Kenulph, who “first made the wall
about the minster; then gave he that to name Peterborough which was
before called Medeshamstede.”--_Saxon Chronicle_ A.D. 963.


NOTE III.

SITE OF THE BATTLE OF ASHDOWN.

There are four spots in Berkshire which claim the honour of being the
Œscendun of the chroniclers, where Æthelred and Alfred gained their
great victory; they are Ilsley, Ashamstead, Aston in the parish of
Bluberry, and Ashdown, close to White Horse Hill. Now it seems clear
that Ashdown was, in Saxon times, the name of a district stretching
over a considerable portion of the Berkshire chalk range, and it is
quite possible that all of the above sites may have been included in
that district; therefore, I do not insist much upon the name, though
whatever weight is to be attached to it, must tell in favour of the
latter site, that of Ashdown. Let us, however, consider the other
qualifications of the rival sites.

That of Ilsley is supported, so far as I know, only by Hewitt in his
antiquities of the Hundred of Compton (1844); and his argument rests
chiefly on the fitness of the ground for the scene of a great battle.
He tells us that the detachments of three Waterloo regiments, marching
through Ilsley in 1816, when they came to the spot, stopped and called
out, “Waterloo! Waterloo!” to one another. He also states that the name
Ilsley is, in fact, “Hilde læg,” the field of battle; but as he has no
tradition in his favour, and cannot, so far as I know, point to any
remains in the neighbourhood in support of his theory, I think his case
must fail, and only mention it to show that I have not overlooked the
claim.

Ashamstead, situate five miles to the southeast of Ilsley, is named by
the Lysons in their topographical account of Berkshire as the probable
site of the battle, but they give no reasons, and are unsupported by
tradition or remains.

Aston has a stronger case. It is situate between Wallingford and
Ilsley. The range of chalk hills rises just above it, and one detached
hill is here thrown out into the vale, on which are still visible
considerable earthworks. There is a chapel called Thorn Chapel on the
eastern slope of this hill, and I am told there is a tradition that
this chapel was built on the spot where some Saxon king heard mass on
the morning of a battle. It is suggested by Mr. Lousley and others,
that the Saxons occupied this outlying hill, the Danes the opposite
range; and that the battle was fought in the valley between, where,
when the road was recently altered, a number of bones were found,
apparently thrown in together without care, as would be the case after
a battle. There are, however, no regular barrows or other remains.
Bishop Gibson is in favour of this spot, on account, as it would seem,
of a passage in the Saxon Chronicle for the year 1006, which runs as
follows: “They” (the Danes) “destroyed Wallingford, and passed a night
at Cholsey.” Then they “turned _along Ashdown_ to Cwichelmes Low.”

The bishop says, that Cwichelmes Low (the _low_ or hill of King
Cwichelm, who reigned in these parts, and died in the year 636 A.D.)
is Cuckhamsley Hill, or Scuchamore Knob, as it is generally called;
a high hill in the same chalk range, about ten miles east of White
Horse Hill; and he argues that, as the Danes went _from_ Wallingford,
_by_ Ashdown, _to_ Cwichelmes Low, we must look for Ashdown between
Wallingford and Cuckhamsley Hill. Now Aston lies directly between the
two, therefore Aston is Ashdown, and the site of the battle. But the
place now called Ashdown is on the further side of Cuckhamsley Hill
from Wallingford--therefore the Danes could not have passed it in
getting from Wallingford to Cuckhamsley Hill--therefore the modern
Ashdown cannot be the site of the battle.

To this I answer, _First_, the Bishop _assumes_ that Cwichelmes Low is
Cuckhamsley Hill, without giving any reason.

_Secondly_, assuming Cwichelmes Low and Cuckhamsley Hill to be
identical; yet, as Ashdown was clearly a large tract of country, the
Danes might go from Wallingford, _along_ a part of it, _to_ Cwichelmes
Low without passing the battle-field.

_Thirdly_, the name Aston is written “Estone” in Domesday Book; meaning
“East town,” or enclosure, and not “Mons fraxini,” the “Hill of the
Ash-tree.”

_Fourthly_, Æthelred and Alfred would have kept to the hills in their
retreat, and never have allowed the Danes to push them out into the
Thames-valley, where the Pagan cavalry would have been invaluable; but
this must have been the case, if we suppose Aston to be the site of
the battle. Lastly, all the above sites are too near to Reading, the
farthest being only sixteen miles from that town. But Æthelred and
Alfred had been retreating three days, and would therefore much more
probably be found at Ashdown by White Horse Hill, which is ten miles
farther along the range of hills.

Ashdown, the remaining site, and the one which I believe to be the true
one, is the down which surrounds White Horse Hill, in the parish of
Uffington. On the highest point of the hill, which is 893 feet above
the level of the sea, stands Uffington Castle, a plain of more than
eight acres in extent, surrounded by earthworks, and a single deep
ditch, which Camden, and other high authorities, say are Danish.

There is another camp, with earthworks, called Hardwell Camp, about a
mile W.N.W. of Uffington Castle, and a third smaller circular camp,
called King Alfred’s camp, about a mile to the S.W., which may still
be made out, close to the wall of Ashdown Park, Lord Craven’s seat,
although Aubrey says, that in his time the works were “almost quite
defaced, by digging for the Sarsden stones to build my Lord Craven’s
house in the Park.” Wise suggests that the Danes held Uffington Castle;
that Æthelred was in Hardwell-camp, and Alfred in Alfred’s camp. A
mile and a half to the eastward, in which direction the battle must
have rolled, as the Saxons slowly gained the day, is a place called
the Seven Barrows, where are seven circular burial-mounds, and several
other large irregularly-shaped mounds, full of bones; the light soil
which covers the chalk is actually black around them. The site
agrees in all points with the description in the chroniclers; it is
the proper distance from Reading; the name is the one used by the
chroniclers,--“Ash-down,” “Mons Fraxini,” “Æscendun;” it is likely that
Æthelred would have fought somewhere hereabouts to protect Wantage, a
royal burg, and his birthplace, which would have been otherwise at the
mercy of the enemy; and lastly, there--and not at Cuckhamsley Hill,
or elsewhere--is carved the White Horse, which has been from time
immemorial held to be a monument of the great victory of Ashdown. For
the above reasons, I think we are justified in claiming this as the
site of the battle.


NOTE IV.

WAYLAND SMITH’S CAVE.

Wise (see p. 35) says he thinks he has discovered the place of burial
of King Basreg, Bagseeg (or whatever his name might be, for it is
given in seven or eight different ways in the chroniclers), in Wayland
Smith’s cave, which place he describes as follows:--

“The place is distinguished by a parcel of stones set on edge, and
enclosing a piece of ground raised a few feet above the common level,
which every one knows was the custom of the Danes, as well as of some
other northern nations. And Wormius observes, that if any Danish chief
was slain in a foreign country, they took care to bury him as pompously
as if he had died in his own. Mr. Aubrey’s account of it is this:
‘About a mile [or less] from the Hill [White Horse Hill] there are a
great many large stones, which, though very confused, must yet be laid
there on purpose. Some of them are placed edgewise, but the rest are so
disorderly that one would imagine they were tumbled out of a cart.’ The
disorder which Mr. Aubrey speaks of is occasioned by the people having
thrown down some of the stones (for they all seem originally to have
been set on edge), and broken them to pieces to mend their highways.
Those that are left enclose a piece of ground of an irregular figure at
present, but which formerly might have been an oblong square, extending
only north and south.

“On the east side of the southern extremity stand three squarish flat
stones of about four or five feet over each way, set on edge, and
supporting a fourth of much larger dimensions, lying flat upon them.
These altogether form a cavern or sheltering-place, resembling pretty
exactly those described by Wormius, Bartholine, and others, except in
the dimensions of the stones; for whereas this may shelter only ten or
a dozen sheep from a storm, Wormius mentions one in Denmark that would
shelter a hundred.

“I know of no other monument of this sort in England; but in Wales
and the Isle of Anglesey there are several not unlike it, called by
the natives _Cromlechs_. The Isle of Anglesey having been the chief
seat of the Druids, induced its learned antiquary to ascribe them to
the ancient Britons; an assertion that I will not take upon me to
contradict, but shall only at this time observe, that I find sufficient
authorities to convince me that ours must be Danish.

“Whether this remarkable piece of antiquity ever bore the name of the
person here buried is not now to be learned, the true meaning of it
being long since lost in ignorance and fable. All the account which the
country people are able to give of it is, ‘At this place lived formerly
an invisible smith; and if a traveller’s horse had lost a shoe upon the
road, he had no more to do than to bring the horse to this place, with
a piece of money, and leaving both there for some little time, he might
come again and find the money gone, but the horse new shod.’ The stones
standing upon the _Rudgeway_, as it is called (which was the situation
that they chose for burial monuments), I suppose gave occasion to the
whole being called Wayland Smith, which is the name it was always known
by to the country people.

“An English antiquary might find business enough who should attempt to
unriddle all the fabulous traditions of the vulgar, which ascribe these
works of unknown antiquity to demons and invisible powers.

“Leaving, therefore, the story of the invisible smith to be discussed
by those who have more leisure, I only remark, that these stones are,
according to the best Danish antiquaries, a burial altar; that their
being raised in the midst of a plain field, near the great road, seems
to indicate some person there slain and buried, and that this person
was probably a chief or king; there being no monument of this sort near
that place, perhaps not in England, beside.” (See pp. 35, 36, 37.)

I have given Wise’s statement of his own case, but the better opinion
amongst antiquaries seems to be that he is wrong, and that the
cromlech, called Wayland Smith’s Cave, is of much earlier date than 871
A.D.

I insert here the note from Kenilworth (note B, p. 218) in which Sir
Walter Scott mentions Wayland Smith’s Cave:--

“The great defeat given by Alfred to the Danish invaders, is said
by Mr. Gough to have taken place near Ashdown in Berkshire. The
burial-place of Bœreg, the Danish chief who was slain in this fight, is
distinguished by a parcel of stones, less than a mile from the hill,
set on edge, enclosing a piece of ground somewhat raised. On the east
side of the southern extremity, stand three squarish flat stones, of
about four or five feet over either way, supporting a fourth, and now
called by the vulgar Wayland Smith, from an idle tradition about an
invisible smith replacing lost horseshoes there.” (Gough’s edition of
Camden’s _Britannica_. Vol. I. p. 221.)

“The popular belief still retains memory of this wild legend, which,
connected as it is with the site of a Danish sepulchre, may have arisen
from some legend concerning the northern Duergar, who resided in the
rocks, and were cunning workers in steel and iron. It was believed that
Wayland Smith’s fee was sixpence, and that, unlike other workmen, he
was offended if more was offered. Of late his offices have been again
called to memory; but fiction has in this, as in other cases, taken the
liberty to pillage the stores of oral tradition. This monument must
be very ancient, for it has been kindly pointed out to me that it is
referred to in an ancient Saxon charter as a landmark. The monument has
been of late cleared out, and made considerably more conspicuous.”

It will be seen from this that Sir Walter assumes the view of Wise to
be correct, but he never saw the place.


NOTE V.

As an illustration of one of the methods by which traditions are
kept up in the country, I insert some verses written by Job Cork, an
Uffington man of two generations back, who was a shepherd on White
Horse Hill for fifty years.

    “It was early one summer’s morn,
    The weather fine and very warm,
    A stranger to White Horse Hill did go
    To view the plains and fields below.

    “As he along the hill did ride,
    Taking a view on every side,
    The which he did so much enjoy
    Till a shepherd’s dog did him annoy.

    “At length an aged man appeared,
    A watching of his fleecy herd,
    With threadbare coat and downcast eye,
    To which the stranger did draw nigh.

    “‘O noble shepherd, can you tell
    How long you kept sheep on this hill?’
    ‘Zeven yeur in Zundays I have been
    A shepherd on this hill so green.’

    “‘That is a long time, I must own,
    You have kept sheep upon this down;
    I think that you must have been told
    Of things that have been done of old.’

    “‘Ah, Zur, I can remember well
    The stories the old voke do tell--
    Upon this hill which here is seen
    Many a battle there have been.

    “‘If it is true as I heard zay,
    King Gaarge did here the dragon slay,
    And down below on yonder hill
    They buried him as I heard tell.

    “‘If you along the Rudgeway go,
    About a mile for aught I know,
    There Wayland’s Cave then you may see
    Surrounded by a group of trees.

    “‘They say that in this cave did dwell
    A smith that was invisible;
    At last he was found out, they say,
    He blew up the place and vlod away.

    “‘To Devonshire then he did go,
    Full of sorrow, grief, and woe,
    Never to return again,
    So here I’ll add the shepherd’s name--

    “JOB CORK.’”

There is no merit in the lines beyond quaintness; but they are written
in the sort of jingle which the poor remember; they have lived for
fifty years and more, and will probably, in quiet corners of the Vale,
outlive the productions of much more celebrated versemakers than Job
Cork, though probably they were never reduced into writing until
written out at my request.

Job Cork was a village humorist, and stories are still told of his
sayings, some of which have a good deal of fun in them; I give one
example in the exact words in which it was told to me:--

“One night as Job Cork came off the downs, drough-wet to his very skin,
it happened his wife had been a baking. So, when he went to bed, his
wife took his leather breeches, and put ’em in the oven to dry ’em.
When he woke in the morning he began to feel about for his thengs,
and he called out, and zed, ‘Betty, where be mee thengs?’ ‘In the
oven,’ zed his wife. Zo he looked in the oven and found his leather
breeches all cockled up together like a piece of parchment, and he
bawled out, ‘O Lard! O Lard! what be I to do? Was ever man plagued as
I be?’ ‘Patience, Job, patience, Job,’ zed his wife; ‘remember thy old
namesake, how he was plagued.’ ‘Ah!’ zed the old man, ‘’a was plagued
surely; but his wife never baked his breeches.’”

Other shepherds of the Hill have been poets in a rough sort of way. I
add one of their home-made songs, as I am anxious to uphold the credit
of my countrymen as a tuneful race.

    “Come, all you shepherds as minds for to be,
      You must have a gallant heart,
    You must not be down-hearted,
      You must a-bear the smart;
    You must a-bear the smart, my boys,
      Let it hail or rain or snow,
    For there is no ale to be had on the Hill
      Where the wintry wind doth blow.

    “When I kept sheep on White Horse Hill
      My heart began to ache,
    My old ewes all hung down their heads,
      And my lambs began to bleat.
    Then I cheered up with courage bold,
      And over the Hill did go,
    For there is no ale to be had on the Hill
      When the wintry wind doth blow.

    “I drive my sheep into the fold,
      To keep them safe all night,
    For drinking of good ale, my boys,
      It is my heart’s delight.
    I drove my sheep into the fold,
      And homeward I did go,
    For there is no ale to be had on the Hill
      When the wintry wind doth blow.

    “We shepherds are the liveliest lads
      As ever trod English ground,
    If we drops into an ale-house
      We values not a crownd.
    We values not a crownd, my boys,
      We’ll pay before we go,
    For there is no ale to be had on the Hill
      When the wintry wind doth blow.”

THE END.




A LIST OF BOOKS PUBLISHED BY TICKNOR AND FIELDS.

🖙 Any books in this list will be sent free of postage, on receipt of
price.

BOSTON, 135 WASHINGTON STREET

JANUARY, 1859.


Sir Walter Scott.

ILLUSTRATED HOUSEHOLD EDITION OF THE WAVERLEY NOVELS. In portable size,
16mo. form. Price 75 cents a volume.

The paper is of fine quality; the stereotype plates are not old ones
repaired, the type having been cast expressly for this edition. The
Novels are illustrated with capital steel plates engraved in the best
manner, after drawings and paintings by the most eminent artists, among
whom are Birket Foster, Darley, Billings, Landseer, Harvey, and Faed.
This Edition contains all the latest notes and corrections of the
author, a Glossary and Index; and some curious additions, especially
in “Guy Mannering” and the “Bride of Lammermoor;” being the fullest
edition of the Novels ever published. _The notes are at the foot of the
page_,--a great convenience to the reader.

Any of the following Novels sold separate.

WAVERLEY, 2 vols.

GUY MANNERING, 2 vols.

THE ANTIQUARY, 2 vols.

ROB ROY, 2 vols.

OLD MORTALITY, 2 vols.

BLACK DWARF, 2 vols.

LEGEND OF MONTROSE, 2 vols.

HEART OF MID LOTHIAN, 2 vols.

BRIDE OF LAMMERMOOR, 2 vols.

IVANHOE, 2 vols.

THE MONASTERY, 2 vols.

THE ABBOT, 2 vols.

KENILWORTH, 2 vols.

THE PIRATE, 2 vols.

THE FORTUNES OF NIGEL, 2 vols.

PEVERIL OF THE PEAK, 2 vols.

QUENTIN DURWARD, 2 vols.

ST. RONAN’S WELL, 2 vols.

REDGAUNTLET, 2 vols.

THE BETROTHED, 2 vols.

THE HIGHLAND WIDOW, 2 vols.

THE TALISMAN, 2 vols.

TWO DROVERS, 2 vols.

MY AUNT MARGARET’S MIRROR, 2 vols.

THE TAPESTRIED CHAMBER, 2 vols.

THE LAIRD’S JOCK, 2 vols.

WOODSTOCK, 2 vols.

THE FAIR MAID OF PERTH, 2 vols.

ANNE OF GEIERSTEIN, 2 vols.

COUNT ROBERT OF PARIS, 2 vols.

THE SURGEON’S DAUGHTER, 2 vols.

CASTLE DANGEROUS, 2 vols.

INDEX AND GLOSSARY, 2 vols.


Thomas De Quincey.

CONFESSIONS OF AN ENGLISH OPIUM-EATER, AND SUSPIRIA DE PROFUNDIS. With
Portrait. 75 cents.

BIOGRAPHICAL ESSAYS. 75 cents.

MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS. 75 cents.

THE CÆSARS. 75 cents.

LITERARY REMINISCENCES. 2 vols. $1.50.

NARRATIVE AND MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS. 2 vols. $1.50.

ESSAYS ON THE POETS, &c. 1 vol. 16mo. 75 cents.

HISTORICAL AND CRITICAL ESSAYS. 2 vols. $1.50.

AUTOBIOGRAPHIC SKETCHES. 1 vol. 75 cents.

ESSAYS ON PHILOSOPHICAL WRITERS, &c. 2 vols. 16mo. $1.50.

LETTERS TO A YOUNG MAN, and other Papers. 1 vol. 75 cents.

THEOLOGICAL ESSAYS AND OTHER PAPERS. 2 vols. $1.50.

THE NOTE BOOK. 1 vol. 75 cents.

MEMORIALS AND OTHER PAPERS. 2 vols. 16mo. $1.50.


Alfred Tennyson.

POETICAL WORKS. With Portrait. 2 vols. Cloth. $2.00.

POCKET EDITION OF POEMS COMPLETE. 75 cents.

THE PRINCESS. Cloth. 50 cents.

IN MEMORIAM. Cloth. 75 cents.

MAUD, AND OTHER POEMS. Cloth. 50 cents.


Charles Reade.

PEG WOFFINGTON. A NOVEL. 75 cents.

CHRISTIE JOHNSTONE. A NOVEL. 75 cents.

CLOUDS AND SUNSHINE. A NOVEL. 75 cents.

‘NEVER TOO LATE TO MEND.’ 2 vols. $1.50.

WHITE LIES. A NOVEL. 1 vol. $1.25.

PROPRIA QUÆ MARIBUS and THE BOX TUNNEL. 25 cts.


Henry W. Longfellow.

POETICAL WORKS. In two volumes. 16mo. Boards. $2.00.

POCKET EDITION OF POETICAL WORKS. In two volumes. $1.75.

POCKET EDITION OF PROSE WORKS COMPLETE. In two volumes. $1.75.

THE SONG OF HIAWATHA. $1.00.

EVANGELINE: A TALE OF ACADIE. 75 cents.

THE GOLDEN LEGEND. A POEM. $1.00.

HYPERION. A ROMANCE. $1.00.

OUTRE-MER. A PILGRIMAGE. $1.00.

KAVANAGH. A TALE. 75 cents.

THE COURTSHIP OF MILES STANDISH. 1 vol. 16mo. 75 cents.

Illustrated editions of EVANGELINE, POEMS, HYPERION, and THE GOLDEN
LEGEND.


Oliver Wendell Holmes.

POEMS. With fine Portrait. Boards. $1.00. Cloth. $1.12.

ASTRÆA. Fancy paper. 25 cents.


William Howitt.

LAND, LABOR, AND GOLD. 2 vols. $2.00.

A BOY’S ADVENTURES IN AUSTRALIA. 75 cents.


Charles Kingsley.

TWO YEARS AGO. A New Novel. $1.25.

AMYAS LEIGH. A Novel $1.25.

GLAUCUS; OR, THE WONDERS OF THE SHORE. 50 cts.

POETICAL WORKS. 75 cents.

THE HEROES; OR, GREEK FAIRY TALES. 75 cents.

ANDROMEDA AND OTHER POEMS. 50 cents.

SIR WALTER RALEIGH AND HIS TIME, &c. $1.25.


Nathaniel Hawthorne.

TWICE-TOLD TALES. Two volumes. $1.50.

THE SCARLET LETTER. 75 cents.

THE HOUSE OF THE SEVEN GABLES. $1.00.

THE SNOW IMAGE, AND OTHER TALES. 75 cents.

THE BLITHEDALE ROMANCE. 75 cents.

MOSSES FROM AN OLD MANSE. 2 vols. $1.50.

TRUE STORIES FROM HISTORY AND BIOGRAPHY. With four fine Engravings. 75
cents.

A WONDER-BOOK FOR GIRLS AND BOYS. With seven fine Engravings. 75 cents.

TANGLEWOOD TALES. Another “Wonder-Book.” With Engravings. 88 cents.


Barry Cornwall.

ENGLISH SONGS AND OTHER SMALL POEMS. $1.00.

DRAMATIC POEMS. Just published. $1.00.

ESSAYS AND TALES IN PROSE. 2 vols. $1.50.


James Russell Lowell.

COMPLETE POETICAL WORKS. In Blue and Gold. 2 vols. $1.50.

POETICAL WORKS. 2 vols. 16mo. Cloth. $1.50.

SIR LAUNFAL. New Edition. 25 cents.

A FABLE FOR CRITICS. New Edition. 50 cents.

THE BIGLOW PAPERS. A New Edition. 63 cents.


Coventry Patmore.

THE ANGEL IN THE HOUSE. BETROTHAL.

     ”      ”      ”    ESPOUSALS. 75 cts. each.


Charles Sumner.

ORATIONS AND SPEECHES. 2 vols. $2.50.

RECENT SPEECHES AND ADDRESSES. $1.25.


John G. Whittier.

POCKET EDITION OF POETICAL WORKS. 2 vols. $1.50.

OLD PORTRAITS AND MODERN SKETCHES. 75 cents.

MARGARET SMITH’S JOURNAL. 75 cents.

SONGS OF LABOR, AND OTHER POEMS. Boards. 50 cts.

THE CHAPEL OF THE HERMITS. Cloth. 50 cents.

LITERARY RECREATIONS, &c. Cloth. $1.00.

THE PANORAMA, AND OTHER POEMS. Cloth. 50 cents.


Alexander Smith.

A LIFE DRAMA. 1 vol. 16mo. 50 cents.

CITY POEMS. 1 vol. 16mo. 63 cents.


Bayard Taylor.

POEMS OF HOME AND TRAVEL. Cloth. 75 cents.

POEMS OF THE ORIENT. Cloth. 75 cents.


Edwin P. Whipple.

ESSAYS AND REVIEWS. 2 vols. $2.00.

LECTURES ON LITERATURE AND LIFE. 63 cents.

WASHINGTON AND THE REVOLUTION. 20 cents.


George S. Hillard.

SIX MONTHS IN ITALY. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.50.

DANGERS AND DUTIES OF THE MERCANTILE PROFESSION. 25 cents.

SELECTIONS FROM THE WRITINGS OF WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR. 1 vol. 16mo 75
cents.


Robert Browning.

POETICAL WORKS. 2 vols. $2.00.

MEN AND WOMEN. 1 vol. $1.00.


Henry Giles.

LECTURES, ESSAYS, &c. 2 vols. $1.50.

DISCOURSES ON LIFE. 75 cents.

ILLUSTRATIONS OF GENIUS. Cloth. $1.00.


William Motherwell.

POEMS, NARRATIVE AND LYRICAL. New Ed. $1.25.

POSTHUMOUS POEMS. Boards. 50 cents.

MINSTRELSY, ANC. AND MOD. 2 vols. Boards. $1.50.


Capt. Mayne Reid.

THE PLANT HUNTERS. With Plates. 75 cents.

THE DESERT HOME: OR, THE ADVENTURES OF A LOST FAMILY IN THE WILDERNESS.
With fine Plates. $1.00.

THE BOY HUNTERS. With fine Plates. 75 cents.

THE YOUNG VOYAGEURS: OR, THE BOY HUNTERS IN THE NORTH. With Plates. 75
cents.

THE FOREST EXILES. With fine Plates. 75 cents.

THE BUSH BOYS. With fine Plates. 75 cents.

THE YOUNG YAGERS. With fine Plates. 75 cents.

RAN AWAY TO SEA: AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY FOR BOYS. With fine Plates. 75 cents.


Goethe.

WILHELM MEISTER. Translated by _Carlyle_. 2 vols. $2.50.

FAUST. Translated by _Hayward_. 75 cents.

FAUST. Translated by _Charles T. Brooks_. $1.00.


Rev. Charles Lowell.

PRACTICAL SERMONS. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.25.

OCCASIONAL SERMONS. With fine Portrait. $1.25.


Rev. F. W. Robertson.

    SERMONS. First Series.  $1.00.
       ”     Second  ”      $1.00.
       ”     Third   ”      $1.00.
       ”     Fourth  ”      $1.00.

LECTURES AND ADDRESSES ON LITERARY AND SOCIAL TOPICS.


R. H. Stoddard.

POEMS. Cloth. 63 cents.

ADVENTURES IN FAIRY LAND. 75 cents.

SONGS OF SUMMER. 75 cents.


George Lunt.

LYRIC POEMS, &c. Cloth. 63 cents.

JULIA. A Poem. 50 cents.


Philip James Bailey.

THE MYSTIC, AND OTHER POEMS. 50 cents.

THE ANGEL WORLD, &c. 50 cents.

THE AGE, A SATIRE. 75 cents.


Anna Mary Howitt.

AN ART STUDENT IN MUNICH. $1.25.

A SCHOOL OF LIFE. A Story. 75 cents.


Mary Russell Mitford.

OUR VILLAGE. Illustrated. 2 vols. 16mo. $2.50.

ATHERTON, AND OTHER STORIES. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.25.


Josiah Phillips Quincy.

LYTERIA: A DRAMATIC POEM. 50 cents.

CHARICLES: A DRAMATIC POEM. 50 cents.


Grace Greenwood.

GREENWOOD LEAVES. 1st & 2d Series. $1.25 each.

POETICAL WORKS. With fine Portrait. 75 cents.

HISTORY OF MY PETS. With six fine Engravings. Scarlet cloth. 50 cents.

RECOLLECTIONS OF MY CHILDHOOD. With six fine Engravings. Scarlet cloth.
50 cents.

HAPS AND MISHAPS OF A TOUR IN EUROPE. $1.25.

MERRIE ENGLAND. A new Juvenile. 75 cents.

A FOREST TRAGEDY, AND OTHER TALES. $1.00.

STORIES AND LEGENDS. A new Juvenile. 75 cents.


Mrs. Crosland.

LYDIA: A WOMAN’S BOOK. Cloth. 75 cents.

ENGLISH TALES AND SKETCHES. Cloth. $1.00.

MEMORABLE WOMEN. Illustrated. $1.00.


Mrs. Jameson.

    CHARACTERISTICS OF WOMEN. Blue and Gold. 75 cents.
    LOVES OF THE POETS.         ”        ”   75 cents.
    DIARY OF AN ENNUYÉE.        ”        ”   75 cents.
    SKETCHES OF ART, &c.        ”        ”   75 cents.


Mrs. Mowatt.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF AN ACTRESS. $1.25.

PLAYS. ARMAND AND FASHION. 50 cents.

MIMIC LIFE. 1 vol. $1.25.

THE TWIN ROSES. 1 vol. 75 cents.


Mrs. Howe.

PASSION FLOWERS. 75 cents.

WORDS FOR THE HOUR. 75 cents.

THE WORLD’S OWN. 50 cents.


Alice Cary.

POEMS. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.00.

CLOVERNOOK CHILDREN. With Plates. 75 cents.


Mrs. Eliza B. Lee.

MEMOIR OF THE BUCKMINSTERS. $1.25.

FLORENCE, THE PARISH ORPHAN. 50 cents.

PARTHENIA. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.00.


Samuel Smiles.

LIFE OF GEORGE STEPHENSON: RAILWAY ENGINEER. $1.25.


Blanchard Jerrold.

DOUGLAS JERROLD’S WIT. 75 cents.

LIFE AND LETTERS OF DOUGLAS JERROLD.


Mrs. Judson.

ALDERBROOK. By _Fanny Forrester_. 2 vols. $1.75.

THE KATHAYAN SLAVE, AND OTHER PAPERS. 1 vol. 63 cents.

MY TWO SISTERS: A SKETCH FROM MEMORY. 50 cents.


Trelawny.

RECOLLECTIONS OF SHELLEY AND BYRON. 75 cents.


Charles Sprague.

POETICAL AND PROSE WRITINGS. With fine Portrait Boards. 75 cents.


Mrs. Lawrence.

LIGHT ON THE DARK RIVER: OR MEMOIRS OF MRS. HAMLIN. 1 vol. 16mo. Cloth.
$1.00.


G. A. Sala.

A JOURNEY DUE NORTH. $1.00.


Thomas W. Parsons.

POEMS. $1.00.


John G. Saxe.

POEMS. With Portrait. Boards. 63 cents. Cloth. 75 cents.


Charles T. Brooks.

GERMAN LYRICS. Translated. 1 vol. 16mo. Cloth. $1.00.


Samuel Bailey.

ESSAYS ON THE FORMATION OF OPINIONS AND THE PURSUIT OF TRUTH. 1 vol.
16mo. $1.00.


Tom Brown.

SCHOOL DAYS AT RUGBY. By _An Old Boy_. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.00.

THE SCOURING OF THE WHITE HORSE, OR THE LONG VACATION HOLIDAY OF A
LONDON CLERK. By _The Author of ‘School Days at Rugby.’_ 1 vol. 16mo.


Leigh Hunt.

POEMS. Blue and Gold. 2 vols. $1.50.


Gerald Massey.

POETICAL WORKS. Blue and Gold. 75 cents.


C. W. Upham.

JOHN C. FREMONT’S LIFE, EXPLORATIONS, &c. With Illustrations. 75 cents.


W. M. Thackeray.

BALLADS. 1 vol. 16mo. 75 cents.


Charles Mackay.

POEMS. 1 vol. Cloth. $1.00.


Henry Alford.

POEMS. $1.25.


Richard Monckton Milnes.

POEMS OF MANY YEARS. Boards. 75 cents.


George H. Boker.

PLAYS AND POEMS. 2 vols. $2.00.


Matthew Arnold.

POEMS. 75 cents.


W. Edmondstoune Aytoun.

BOTHWELL. 75 cents.


Mrs. Rosa V. Johnson.

POEMS. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.00.


Henry T. Tuckerman.

POEMS. Cloth. 75 cents.


William Mountford.

THORPE: A QUIET ENGLISH TOWN, AND HUMAN LIFE THEREIN. 16mo. $1.00.


John Bowring.

MATINS AND VESPERS. 50 cents.


Yriarte.

FABLES. Translated by _G. H. Devereux_. 63 cents.


Phœbe Cary.

POEMS AND PARODIES. 75 cents.


E. Foxton.

PREMICES. $1.00.


Paul H. Hayne.

POEMS. 1 vol. 16mo. 63 cents.


Mrs. A. C. Lowell.

SEED-GRAIN FOR THOUGHT AND DISCUSSION. 2 vols. $1.75.

EDUCATION OF GIRLS. 25 cents.


G. H. Lewes.

THE LIFE AND WORKS OF GOETHE. 2 vols. 16mo. $2.50.


Lieut. Arnold.

OAKFIELD. A Novel. $1.00.


Henry D. Thoreau.

WALDEN: OR, LIFE IN THE WOODS. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.00.


Washington Allston.

MONALDI, A TALE. 1 vol. 16mo. 75 cents.


Professor E. T. Channing.

LECTURES ON ORATORY AND RHETORIC. 75 cents.


Dr. Walter Channing.

A PHYSICIAN’S VACATION. $1.50.


Mrs. Horace Mann.

A PHYSIOLOGICAL COOKERY BOOK. 63 cents.


Horace and James Smith.

REJECTED ADDRESSES. Cloth, 63 cts.


Christopher Wordsworth.

WILLIAM WORDSWORTH’S BIOGRAPHY. 2 vols. $2.50.


Henry Taylor.

NOTES FROM LIFE. By the Author of “Philip Van Artevelde.” 1 vol. 16mo.
Cloth. 63 cents.


Hufeland.

ART OF PROLONGING LIFE. Edited by Erasmus Wilson, 1 vol. 16mo. 75 cents.


Dr. Jacob Bigelow.

NATURE IN DISEASE. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.25.


Dr. John C. Warren.

THE PRESERVATION OF HEALTH, &c. 1 vol. 38 cents.


James Prior.

LIFE OF EDMUND BURKE. 2 vols. $2.00.


Joseph T. Buckingham.

PERSONAL MEMOIRS AND RECOLLECTIONS OF EDITORIAL LIFE. With Portrait. 2
vols. 16mo. $1.50.


Bayle St. John.

VILLAGE LIFE IN EGYPT. By the Author of “Purple Tints of Paris.” 2
vols. 16mo. $1.25.


Edmund Quincy.

WENSLEY: A STORY WITHOUT A MORAL. 75 cents.


Henry Morley.

PALISSY THE POTTER. By the Author of “How to make Home Unhealthy.” 2
vols. 16mo. $1.50.


Goldsmith.

THE VICAR OF WAKEFIELD. Illustrated Edition. $3.00.


C. A. Bartol.

CHURCH AND CONGREGATION. $1.00.


Mrs. H. G. Otis.

THE BARCLAYS OF BOSTON. 1 vol. 12mo. $1.25.


Horace Mann.

THOUGHTS FOR A YOUNG MAN. 25 cents.


Addison.

SIR ROGER DE COVERLEY. From the “Spectator.” 75 cents.


F. W. P. Greenwood.

SERMONS OF CONSOLATION. $1.00.


S. T. Wallis.

SPAIN, HER INSTITUTIONS, POLITICS, AND PUBLIC MEN. $1.00.


Dr. William E. Coale.

HINTS ON HEALTH. 3d Edition. 63 cents.


Mrs. Gaskell.

RUTH. A Novel by the Author of “Mary Barton.” Cheap Edition. 38 cents.


Lord Dufferin.

A YACHT VOYAGE OF 6,000 MILES. $1.00.


Fanny Kemble.

POEMS. Enlarged Edition. $1.00.


Arago.

BIOGRAPHIES OF DISTINGUISHED SCIENTIFIC MEN. $1.00.


William Smith.

THORNDALE, OR THE CONFLICT OF OPINIONS. $1.25.


THE LIFE AND TIMES OF SIR PHILIP SIDNEY. 1 vol. 16mo. $1.00.

ERNEST CARROLL, OR ARTIST LIFE IN ITALY. 1 vol. 16mo. 75 cents.

CHRISTMAS HOURS. By the Author of “The Homeward Path,” &c. 1 vol. 16mo.

MEMORY AND HOPE. Cloth. $2.00.

THALATTA; A BOOK FOR THE SEASIDE. 75 cents.

WARRENIANA; A COMPANION TO REJECTED ADDRESSES. 63 cents.

ANGEL VOICES. 38 cents.

THE BOSTON BOOK. $1.25.

MEMOIR OF ROBERT WHEATON. 1 vol. $1.00.

LABOR AND LOVE: A TALE OF ENGLISH LIFE. 50 cts.

THE SOLITARY OF JUAN FERNANDEZ. By the Author of Picciola. 50 cents.


In Blue and Gold.

LONGFELLOW’S POETICAL WORKS. 2 vols. $1.75

do. PROSE WORKS. 2 vols. $1.75.

TENNYSON’S POETICAL WORKS. 1 vol. 75 cents.

WHITTIER’S POETICAL WORKS. 2 vols. $1.50.

LEIGH HUNT’S POETICAL WORKS. 2 vols. $1.50.

GERALD MASSEY’S POETICAL WORKS. 1 vol. 75 cents.

MRS. JAMESON’S CHARACTERISTICS OF WOMEN. 75 cts.

do. DIARY OF AN ENNUYÉE. 1 vol. 75 cts.

do. LOVES OF THE POETS. 1 vol. 75 cts.

do. SKETCHES OF ART, &c. 1 vol. 75 cts.

BOWRING’S MATINS AND VESPERS. 1 vol. 75 cents.

LOWELL’S (J. RUSSELL) POETICAL WORKS. 2 vols. $1.50.


Illustrated Juvenile Books.

WILLIE WINKIE’S NURSERY SONGS OF SCOTLAND. 75 cts.

CURIOUS STORIES ABOUT FAIRIES. 75 cents.

KIT BAM’S ADVENTURES. 75 cents.

RAINBOWS FOR CHILDREN. 75 cents.

THE MAGICIAN’S SHOW BOX. 75 cents.

OUR GRANDMOTHER’S STORIES. 50 cents.

MEMOIRS OF A LONDON DOLL. 50 cents.

THE DOLL AND HER FRIENDS. 50 cents.

TALES FROM CATLAND. 50 cents.

AUNT EFFIE’S RHYMES FOR LITTLE CHILDREN. 75 cts.

THE STORY OF AN APPLE. 50 cents.

THE GOOD-NATURED BEAR. 75 cents.

PETER PARLEY’S SHORT STORIES. 50 cents.

THE HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION. 38 cts.

THE HISTORY OF THE NEW ENGLAND STATES. 38 cts.

THE HISTORY OF THE MIDDLE STATES. 38 cents.

THE HISTORY OF THE SOUTHERN STATES. 38 cents.

THE HISTORY OF THE WESTERN STATES. 38 cents.

THE SOLITARY OF JUAN FERNANDEZ. 50 cents.

JACK HALLIARD’S VOYAGES. 38 cents.

THE INDESTRUCTIBLE BOOKS. 9 Kinds. Each 25 cents.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Scouring of the White Horse, by Thomas Hughes

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SCOURING OF THE WHITE HORSE ***

***** This file should be named 53241-0.txt or 53241-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/2/4/53241/

Produced by David Edwards and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

